HADITH COMMENTARY

 Edinburgh Studies in Islamic Scripture and Theology
Series Editor: Ramon Harvey
Editorial Advisory Board: Ulrika Mårtensson, Aisha Musa, Shuruq 
Naguib, Johanna Pink, Joshua Ralston, Harith Bin Ramli, Sohaib Saeed 
and David Vishanoff
Published and forthcoming titles
Hadith Commentary: Continuity and Change
Edited by Joel Blecher and Stefanie Brinkmann 
Transcendent God, Rational World: A Māturīdī Theology
Ramon Harvey
edinburghuniversitypress.com/series/esist

 HADITH COMMENTARY
Continuity and Change
EDITED BY  
JOEL BLECHER AND  
STEFANIE BRINKMANN

 Edinburgh University Press is one of the leading university presses in the UK. We publish 
academic books and journals in our selected subject areas across the humanities and social 
sciences, combining cutting-edge scholarship with high editorial and production values to 
produce academic works of lasting importance. For more information visit our website: 
edinburghuniversitypress.com
© editorial matter and organisation Joel Blecher and Stefanie Brinkmann, 2023
© the chapters their several authors, 2023
Cover image: a concluding recitation of Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī at the Zaytuna  
Mosque in Tunis during Ramadan of 1948 
© Mustapha Bouchoucha, Fonds Beil el Bennani
Cover design: www.hayesdesign.co.uk
Edinburgh University Press Ltd
The Tun – Holyrood Road
12 (2f) Jackson’s Entry
Edinburgh EH8 8PJ
Typeset in 11/13 Minion Pro by
IDSUK (DataConnection) Ltd, and
printed and bound in Great Britain
A CIP record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 978 1 4744 6104 7 (hardback)
ISBN 978 1 4744 6106 1 (webready PDF)
ISBN 978 1 4744 6107 8 (epub)
The right of Joel Blecher and Stefanie Brinkmann to be identified as editors of this work 
has been asserted in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988  
and the Copyright and Related Rights Regulations 2003 (SI No. 2498). 

 Contents
List of Figures 
vii
Notes on Contributors 
viii
Preface 
xi
Introduction: What is Hadith Commentary? 
1
 
Joel Blecher and Stefanie Brinkmann
Part I  Formations and Developments in the Early and  
Middle Periods
1 
Between Philology and Hadith Criticism: The Genre of  
Sharḥ Gharīb al-Ḥadīth 
15
 
Stefanie Brinkmann
2 
The Hermeneutics of al-Sharīf al-Murtaḍā: The Interpretation  
of akhbār al-āḥād in Kitāb al-Amālī 
50
 
Ali Aghaei
3 
‘Blessed are the Strangers (ghurabāʾ)’: An Apocalyptic Hadith  
on the Virtues of Loneliness, Sadness and Exile 
79
 
Youshaa Patel
4 
Sufi Contributions to Hadith Commentary 
112
 
Samer Dajani
5 
Ibn Rajab’s Commentary on al-Nawawī’s Forty Hadith:  
Innovation and Audience in the Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm wa-l-ḥikam 
132
 
Mohammad Gharaibeh
6 
The Words of the Imām beyond Philosophy and Tradition:  
Shīʿī Hadith Commentaries in the Ṣafavid Period 
150
 
Sajjad Rizvi

 vi 
CONTENTS
Part II Modern Recollections and Reimaginings
7 
Contesting Ḥanafī Thought in a Twentieth-century Turkish  
Hadith Commentary 
187
 
Susan Gunasti
8 
Debating Authority and Authenticity in Modern South Asian  
Hadith Commentaries: Muḥammad Zakariyyā Kāndhalawī’s  
Awjaz al-masālik 
207
 
Ali Altaf Mian
9 
ʿAllāma Ṭabāṭabāʾī and Exegetical Hadiths in al-Mῑzān:  
A Contemporary Imāmī Commentary on Hadith? 
238
 
Shadi Nafisi
10 Studying Hadith Commentaries in the Digital Age 
263
 
Maroussia Bednarkiewicz, Aslisho Qurboniev and  
Gowaart Van Den Bossche
Afterword: More Comments, Further Questions 
281
 
Joel Blecher
Index 
294

 Figures
3.1 
Isnād map of the short narration of the ‘Blessed are the  
strangers’ hadith 
88
3.2 
Isnād map of the ‘Those who shun their tribes’ narration 
90
7.1 
Title page of volume 1 of the first edition of Sahihi-i  
Buhari Muhtasarı: Tecrid-i Sarih Tercümesi (1928) 
196
10.1 
Hadith classification in the OpenITI corpus, OpenITI 
271
10.2 
Reuse timeline for Badr al-Dīn al-ʿAyni’s ʿUmdat al-qārī 
274
10.3 
Pairwise alignment plot of text reuse between al- 
Māzandarānī’s commentary, Sharḥ ʿUṣūl al-Kāfī  
(upper) and al-Kulaynī’s Uṣūl al-Kāfī (lower) 
276
A.1 
Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī, Bibliotheca Ambrosiana, MS D 347,  
fol. 251b 
282
A.2 
Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī, Bibliotheca Ambrosiana, MS D 348,  
fol. 222b 
284
A.3 
Al-Zarkashī’s commentary on Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī,  
Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin 
288

 Notes on Contributors
Ali Aghaei is a Research Associate at the Institute of Islamic Theology  
of the University of Paderborn. He received his PhD from the Islamic  
Azad University in Tehran. He has worked as a Member of the Academic 
Board in the Encyclopedia Islamica Foundation in Tehran, contributing to 
writing and editing entries in Dāneshnāmeh-ye Jahān-e Eslām, as Research 
Fellow at the Corpus Coranicum project at the Berlin-Brandenburg Acad-
emy of Sciences and Humanities, and as Research Associate and director 
of the Irankoran project, funded by the Federal Ministry of Education and 
Research in Germany and hosted by the Berlin-Brandenburg Academy  
of Sciences and Humanities.
Maroussia Bednarkiewicz is a Research Fellow at the University of Tübin-
gen. She studied German and Russian at the University of Geneva and 
obtained an MA in Islamic studies and History at the University of Oxford. 
Her PhD dissertation delves into the history of the Islamic call to prayer in 
Hadith literature. To develop further the computational analysis of large 
Hadith corpora is the aim of her current project.
Joel Blecher is Associate Professor of History at the George Washington 
University in Washington, DC, the author of Said the Prophet of God: 
Hadith Commentary Across a Millennium (2018), and co-translator of Ibn 
Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī’s Merits of the Plague (2023) with Mairaj Syed. His other 
writings have appeared in the Journal of Near Eastern Studies, Islamic Law 
& Society, Oriens and several edited volumes. His work has been supported 
by the National Endowment for the Humanities, the American Council 
of Learned Societies, the Kluge Center at the Library of Congress, and the 
Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton.
Stefanie Brinkmann is Research Fellow at the Bibliotheca Arabica project  
at the Saxon Academy of Sciences and Humanities in Leipzig. Trained 
in Arabic, Persian and Roman Studies, she had acting professorships at 

  
NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS 
ix
the universities of Freiburg and Hamburg, and was member and princi-
pal investigator of a number of manuscript projects. She has published in 
the fields of manuscript studies, especially on hadith manuscripts, material 
culture in hadith and classical Arabic poetry.
Samer Dajani is an Independent Researcher. He received his BA in Arab 
and Islamic Civilizations from the American University in Cairo, followed 
by an MA and PhD in the field of Islamic Studies from SOAS, University 
of London. He was Research Fellow and Lecturer at the Muslim College 
in Cambridge. His research interests include Hadith, Sufism and Jurispru-
dence. He is the author of Sufis and Sharīʿa: The Forgotten School of Mercy 
(Edinburgh University Press, 2022) and the translator of Reassurance for 
the Seeker: A Biography and Translation of Ṣāliḥ al-Jaʿfarī’s al-Fawāiʾd 
al-Jaʿfariyya (2014).
Mohammad Gharaibeh is Professor of Islamic Intellectual History at 
the Berlin Institute for Islamic Theology at the Humboldt-Universität zu  
Berlin. In his research, he focuses on the history and development of Islamic 
theological ideas and concepts, the circulation and reception of texts, and 
the spread of scholarly networks as well as their impact on the production 
and regulation of Islamic knowledge. He is the editor of Beyond Authenticity: 
Alternative Approaches to Hadith Narrations and Collections (2023).
Susan Gunasti is Professor of Religion at Ohio Wesleyan University,  
specializing in Islam in the Ottoman period. She is the author of The Qurʾan 
between the Ottoman Empire and the Turkish Republic: An Exegetical  
Tradition (2019). Her writings have appeared in the Journal of Islamic 
Studies and Islamic Law and Society.
Ali Altaf Mian is Assistant Professor of Religion and the Izzat Hasan 
Sheikh Fellow in Islamic studies at the University of Florida. His peer-
reviewed articles have appeared in numerous journals, including Islamic 
Law and Society, History of Religions, ReOrient, Journal of Urdu Studies, 
Religion Compass, Journal of Islamic Studies (Oxford), and Journal of 
Shi‘a Islamic Studies. He is presently working on completing several 
manuscripts, including Surviving Modernity: Muslim Ethics and Politics 
in Colonial India and Embodying the Sunnah: Ḥadīth Studies in Modern 
South Asia.
Shadi Nafisi is Associate Professor at the University of Teheran. She 
received her PhD in 2002 and her MA in 1994 from the University of  
Tarbiat Modarress in Teheran. Before coming to the University of Teheran 
in 2012, she worked as Assistant Professor at the University of Qur’an and 
Hadith in Ray (1999–2012). She also served (2001–12) as Research Fellow 

 x 
NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS
in the Department of Qur’an and Hadith Studies of the Encyclopedia of 
Islam Foundation in Teheran.
Aslisho Qurboniev is a Post-doctoral Fellow of the Islamic West at the 
KITAB (Knowledge, Information Technology, and the Arabic Book)  
project at Aga Khan University (Institute for the Study of Muslim Civiliza-
tions, International, London). Aslisho obtained his PhD (2020) from the 
University of Cambridge with a dissertation titled ‘Traditions of Learning  
in Fatimid Ifriqiya (296–362/909–973): Networks, Practices, and Institu-
tions’. Previously he read Islamic Studies and History (MPhil, 2014) at the 
University of Oxford. His research interests also include medieval Islamic 
learning, knowledge transmission, Shi‘i Islam and digital humanities.
Youshaa Patel is Associate Professor of Islamic Studies at the department 
of Religious Studies at Lafayette College and the author of The Muslim 
Difference: Defining the Line between Believers and Unbelievers from Early 
Islam to the Present (2022). His research explores how Islam shaped and 
was shaped by Muslim encounters with Christians, Jews and others in the 
Middle East and beyond.
Sajjad Rizvi is Professor of Islamic Intellectual History at the University 
of Exeter. He is the author of Mullā Ṣadrā Shīrāzī (2007), Mullā Ṣadrā and 
Metaphysics (2009), and most recently with Scott Davison and Shira Weiss 
of The Protests of Job: An Interfaith Dialogue (2022), co-editor with Feras 
Hamza and Farhana Mayer of An Anthology of Qur’anic Commentaries 
(2008), co-editor with Annabel Keeler of The Spirit and the Letter: Approaches 
to the Esoteric Interpretation of the Qur’an (2016), and co-editor with Kazuo 
Morimoto of Knowledge and Power in Muslim Societies: Approaches in  
Intellectual History (2023). His three main research interests are Islamic  
philosophical traditions in the East up to the present day, Qur’anic Studies 
(tafsīr and hermeneutics) and Shi‘i philosophical theology.
Gowaart Van Den Bossche obtained his PhD in history at Ghent Univer-
sity in January 2019 for a dissertation on early Mamluk historiography, 
chancery practice and literary culture. Between 2019 and 2022 he worked 
as Post-doctoral Research Fellow with the KITAB project at Aga Khan Uni-
versity Institute for the Study of Muslim Civilisations in London. He is 
currently a post-doctoral research fellow funded by the Research Founda-
tion Flanders (FWO), working on universal historiography in early eighth/
fourteenth century Egypt and Syria. He has published articles in al-Masaq, 
Annales Islamologiques and Islamic Law and Society on various aspects  
of late medieval Islamic history and society.

 Preface
The idea for this volume was first conceived during a workshop on hadith  
commentaries at the Centre for the Study of Manuscript Cultures in Asia, 
Africa and Europe at Hamburg University (CSMC) in December 2017, 
organised by Stefanie Brinkmann and Ali Zaherinezhad. The workshop 
was part of a project on a heavily annotated Tīmūrid-era manuscript of 
Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī.1 Joel Blecher was the keynote speaker, and his book, Said 
the Prophet of God: Hadith Commentary across a Millennium, had just 
been released in the United States – he brought the first bundle of copies to 
Europe with him in his briefcase. The diversity and range of presentations, 
and the vivid discussions about the practice of hadith commentary made 
clear the many aspects of the tradition that remained unstudied. By the end 
of the workshop, we imagined a volume – Hadith Commentary: Continuity 
and Change – that would bring new scholars into the field and introduce 
new voices to cover an array of topics covering a variety of time periods, 
regions, methodological approaches and sectarian divisions. 
We first thank Ali Zaherinezhad, whose inspiration and efforts were 
critical in the conceptualisation and preparation of this volume at its early 
stages. In a way, this book is also his. We would also like to thank the 
Centre for the Study of Manuscript Cultures in Asia, Africa and Europe 
at Hamburg University for the support and infrastructure that enabled 
us to pursue our research. Furthermore, we thank our current hosting 
institutions, which have facilitated our ongoing research in the field of 
hadith commentary and supported this edited volume in terms of funding 
and infrastructure. They are (in alphabetical order): the Bibliotheca Ara-
bica Project at the Saxon Academy of Sciences and Humanities in Leipzig 
(www.saw-leipzig.de/bibliotheca-arabica); and the George Washington 
 1 The project was part of the Centre for the Study of Manuscript Cultures in Asia, Africa 
and Europe at Hamburg University, funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft; 
Stefanie Brinkmann was the principal investigator, and Ali Zaherinezhad was the 
research fellow.

 xii 
PREFACE
University’s Department of History and the GW Columbian College of 
Arts and Sciences’ Humanities Facilitating Fund. We owe a special thanks 
to Daniel B. Schwartz, Sam Nohra and Michael Weeks for moving moun-
tains to make these funds available. 
We thank the contributors of this volume for their commitment and for 
their new insights. We also thank the anonymous reviewers who gave use-
ful advice and constructive criticism on the individual chapters. We owe 
a debt to Nicola Ramsey, Kirsty Woods and Louise Hutton at Edinburgh 
University Press, as well the series editor, Ramon Harvey, for their support 
and efforts in bringing this volume to print. Special thanks go to Valerie 
Joy Turner for copyediting and indexing the book, work which immensely 
improved its intelligibility and usability.
We also thank our families and friends for their support as we spent 
many long hours away from them working on this book. Joel in particular 
would like to dedicate his work on this project to Summer, Aria and 
Hawthorn.
The transliteration of Arabic, Persian and Turkish names, technical 
terms, and other phrases into Latin characters follows the International 
Journal of Middle Eastern Studies, except for the elision of al- and com-
pound names with Allāh, which we write as one word (e.g. ʿAbdallāh, 
Hibatallāh, versus other compound names such as ʿAbd al-Raḥmān) 
according to the system used by Brill. Well-established terms, such as 
Qur’an, hadith, imam and geographic regions are given in their common 
contemporary forms. We have left Sunni and Shi‘i without diacritics in 
the introduction for the benefit of a wider readership, but have employed 
diacritics for these terms in the other chapters. Dates appear in the Hijrī 
and Common Era forms (e.g. 436/1044) up to the eighteenth century. We 
employ the following abbreviations:
EI2  Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition. Edited by P. Bearman, 
Th. Bianquis, C. E. Bosworth, E. van Donzel, and W. P. Hein-
richs. 12 vols. Leiden: Brill, 1960–2004. Brill Online.
EI3  Encyclopaedia of Islam, THREE. Edited by Kate Fleet, Gudrun 
Krämer, Denis Matringe, John Nawas and Everett Rowson. 
Leiden: Brill, 2007–. Brill Online.
EQ  Encyclopaedia of the Qurʾān. Edited by Jane McAuliffe Dammen. 
6 vols. Leiden: Brill, 2001–6. Brill Online.
EIr  Encyclopaedia Iranica. Edited by Ehsan Yarshater. New York: 
Columbia University. <http://www.iranicaonline.org>.

 Introduction 
What is Hadith Commentary?
Joel Blecher and Stefanie Brinkmann
The tradition of hadith commentary has been a central site of Islamic intel-
lectual life for more than a millennium, yet it has only recently attracted 
scholarly attention among Islamicists.1 Building on this recent work,  
Hadith Commentary: Continuity and Change is the first book to collect a 
range of scholarly essays on key texts and critical themes of hadith com-
mentary across a variety of periods and areas. Addressing the diversity of 
sects, periods and regions in which hadith commentary developed, this 
volume demonstrates that novel intellectual activity did not decline fol-
lowing the so-called ‘golden age’ of Islam, and that in fact the medium of 
commentary thrived. This edited volume pushes the field of hadith studies 
to expand beyond analyses of hadith transmission, and into the vast and 
understudied world of the hadith’s normative significance to those com-
munities that held them to be authentic. 
The present volume is designed for specialists in the field of Islamic 
studies, but may also appeal to non-specialists working on commentary 
traditions in other religions and cultures of learning. This volume aims to 
expand the boundaries of the nascent field of hadith commentary by cover-
ing a broad time frame, from the beginnings of commentarial activity in the 
second/eighth century to the modern voices of the twentieth and twenty-
first centuries, by traversing a vast geographical area from regions across 
the Islamic world, by combining different methodological approaches, and 
by examining commentary traditions from Sunni, Shi‘i and Sufi traditions. 
Before we embark on this ambitious task, a fundamental question must first be 
addressed: What is a hadith commentary? Many might answer the question  
 1 Blecher, Said the Prophet of God; for a bibliography of recent articles related to hadith 
commentary, see Blecher, ‘Ḥadīth Commentary’. 

 2 
JOEL BLECHER AND STEFANIE BRINKMANN
by simply pointing to line-by-line commentaries (sharḥ, pl. shurūḥ) explicat-
ing hadiths in a collection such as Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī. Yet this is just one kind  
of hadith commentary, albeit an important one.
Joel Blecher describes the range of hadith commentary as follows:
Construed broadly, the term could include any formal or informal 
oral or written gloss on a given ḥadīth. Narrowly defined, the practice 
of ḥadīth commentary refers to a cumulative and transregional 
tradition of line-by-line Muslim scholarly exegesis on individual 
ḥadīth and ḥadīth collections, from the late Islamic formative period 
to the present day.2
As we see, at the broadest end of the spectrum, hadith commentary 
may be defined even more widely than Blecher’s passage above suggests. 
Indeed, we might even point to the placement of an epigraphic inscrip-
tion of a hadith on the Dome of the Rock as a loose form of commentary 
on the importance and use of hadith.3 In this sense, we may consider any 
reference to a hadith, whether in architecture or a quotation in a poem 
or a sermon, as commentarial activity or as commentarial gesture. In a 
more narrowly defined sense, we may speak of a genre of hadith com-
mentary in which a later author tries to systematically elucidate an ear-
lier text containing hadith. Such hadith commentaries can encompass 
many approaches to linguistic, legal or theological matters, chains of 
transmission, variants and issues of reliability, but not all commentaries 
cover this range of content, and some are limited to one or a few ele-
ments of these issues. This volume, for example, deliberately includes 
the genre of commentary on obscure terms (gharīb al-ḥadīth) as part 
of the commentary tradition, though this genre is largely dedicated to 
lexical issues. 
What, then, are the range of textual (or even non-textual) forms hadith 
commentary can feature? What are the various methodological approaches 
by which we can define the practice of hadith commentary? Many academic 
studies discussing commentary literature characterise it as secondary. That 
is, the commentary is a secondary text added at a later stage; it annotates 
and elucidates a primary text, mediating between the primary text and the 
reader. This derivative quality is thus, first, a chronological relationship,  
and scholars should be cautious not to consider it derivative in a hierarchical 
or evaluative sense. After all, some commentaries even eclipse the so- 
called primary text they were intended to elucidate. As Jonathan Brown 
 2 Blecher, ‘Ḥadīth Commentary’, in EI3, online: http://dx.doi.org/10.1163/1573-3912_
ei3_COM_32080 (accessed 20 February 2022).
 3 Lucas, ‘An Efficacious Invocation’.

  
INTRODUCTION 
3
states, the primary text ‘acted as a medium for a much more expanded 
discussion in which the author could express his own vision of the Islamic 
worldview’.4 
But the production of commentary on hadith was not limited to 
rereading centuries-old texts in new contexts, or attempting to preserve the 
meaning of primary texts for future generations (or contesting who has the 
power to preserve this transmission); nor should hadith commentary be 
viewed solely as a vessel in which to propagate certain worldviews external 
to it. Rather, hadith commentary is a tradition that cultivates certain 
unique virtues and practices, and links participants to a transgregional and 
transtemporal forum for intellectual exchange.5 It was in this far-reaching 
scholarly network that students and masters could realise religiously 
defined aims and gain social status and recognition. 
And yet, how does one draw the line between a hadith, a hadith collection, 
a hadith commentary and other forms of commentary? If Muhammad or 
one of the Imams explained what he meant by a certain utterance in the 
textual content (matn) of a hadith, is this a form of hadith commentary 
within the hadith itself? And if the compiler of a hadith collection carefully 
selected reports for incorporation into his compilation and left out others –  
is this act of inclusion and exclusion a form of commentary? And if a 
compiler chose to arrange hadiths into chapters and subchapters – is this 
an act of commentary as well?6 If the compiler then added chapter titles, 
or additional textual material (e.g. tarājim, headings or rubrics) to guide 
the reader to and through the following chapters, or after citing a tradition, 
added statements about its reliability, its chains of transmission (isnād), or 
its variants – should these additions be considered commentarial activity? 
And why did many post-canonical hadith compilers select traditions 
from the primary collections and rearrange the material under chapter 
headings, if not to say something new, or address new audiences with  
their collections? 
On the one hand, as the preceding paragraph suggests, we can make  
a strong argument for these examples to be considered ‘commentary’  
 4 Brown, Hadith, 52.
 5 Assmann and Gladigow, in Text und Kommentar, offer insight into the complex  
matters of commentary, on a theoretical level, and regarding the range of regional  
commentary cultures stretching from India and China to mediaeval Europe. Gregor 
Scholer offers an overview of commentary in the ‘classical-Islamic tradition’ (Schoeler, 
‘Text und Kommentar’).
 6 In the case of muṣannaf works, compilers organised hadith into chapters (kitāb,  
pl. kutub) and subchapters (bāb, pl. abwāb). Canonical and redaction criticism (from 
the field of Biblical Studies) has long shown the potential of examining the authorial 
voice or the compiler’s attitude and the aim behind this conscious arrangement of mate-
rial. See Burge, ‘Reading between the Lines’. 

 worthy of more intensive study. On the other hand, there may also be good 
reasons to distinguish these practices from the genre of hadith commen-
tary. After all, these examples cannot be properly characterised by chrono-
logical principles as secondary, in which a hadith, or groups of hadiths 
are commented upon and elucidated through an intentionally separate 
and chronologically later text (be it in written or oral form) – a hypotext 
and a hypertext.7 And yet, if our definition is guided by the principle of 
chronology alone, we would have to consider, by logical extension, many 
other textual forms, such as fatwās, legal or theological treatises (rasāʾil), 
Qur’an commentary (tafsīr), sermons, prophetic medicine and many oth-
ers as forms of hadith commentary, since their explanations and interpre-
tations represent explications of hadiths for present and future purposes.8 
Still, many scholars prefer to treat fatwās, rasāʾil and others as genres  
unto themselves. 
But what, then, can we identify as the decisive principle that distinguishes 
a hadith commentary from a fatwā elaborating on a hadith? One possible 
reply to this question is simply to define a hadith commentary as what 
commentators claimed was a hadith commentary, explicitly embedding 
themselves in that tradition. In this view, a book that the commentators 
themselves classified as hadith commentary is simply considered part of the 
tradition. Commentators might deliberately emphasise that they are part of 
this tradition by giving their commentary a corresponding title, such as a 
sharḥ of al-Bukhārī or a ḥāshiya on al-Nawawī’s Arbaʿīn (‘forty [hadith]’). But 
even if they did not give their works such denotative titles (and in the past, 
it was not uncommon for authors to leave their works untitled, or to allow 
their works to be referred to by a variety of appellations), then later scholarly 
communities might have done so, simply by referring to the book as a sharḥ 
of Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī, or a ḥāshiya on the forty hadith.9 Similarly, an author’s 
announcement in the work’s preface of his intention to elucidate hadith – 
sharaḥa (commenting), or fassara (interpreting) – likewise signals to readers 
that the book should be taken as a contribution to the hadith commentary 
tradition. 
And yet, in our attempt to define this category of hadith commentary, 
the fluidity of the genre’s boundaries has persisted, and, in a sense, any fixed 
definition is beside the point. A definition is a tool that, when calibrated 
 7 Compare Gérard Genette’s concept of hypertextuality with Eric van Lit’s application 
for the Islamic commentary tradition, e.g. in van Lit, ‘Commentary and Commen-
tary Tradition’. See also Chapter 10 of this volume by Bednarkiewicz, Qurboniev and 
Van Den Bossche.
 8 On the terminology of commentary in the field of logic, see Gutas, ‘Aspects of Literary 
Form’. 
 9 Gladigow calls these groups ‘textual communities’. See Gladigow, ‘Der Kommentar als 
Hypothek des Textes’, 35.
4 
JOEL BLECHER AND STEFANIE BRINKMANN

  
INTRODUCTION 
5
and configured in various ways, can offer scholars new insights into shared 
problems. The scholars in the present volume define hadith commentary 
in a wide range of ways that go well beyond the line-by-line sharḥ. These 
varieties include a lexical commentary of gharīb al-ḥadīth, a translation of 
al-Bukhārī’s Ṣaḥīḥ into Turkish, and the hadith criticism laid out by the 
Imāmī scholars al-Sharīf al-Murtaḍā (d. 436/1044) in his Kitāb al-Āmālī 
(Book of dictations), and by Ṭabāṭabāʾī (d. 1402/1981) in his Qur’an com-
mentary al-Mizān.
This variety and fluidity of definitions of hadith commentary also come to 
the fore when we consider the diverse ways that scholars tend to classify 
hadith commentaries. Regardless of how useful such classifications are to 
readers, they allow us to map the variety of hadith commentaries and help 
us analyse how commentators approach their base texts, what they thought 
deserved commentary, for whom and why.
The most common way of classifying hadith commentaries is to dif-
ferentiate them by disciplines: legal, linguistic and theological, among 
others, depending on the primary aim of the commentary. Another 
common method of classifying hadith commentaries is to refer to the 
sectarian affiliation of the commentator within the Islamic intellectual 
tradition; these include, for example, Shi‘i, Sufi, Mālikī or Ḥanbalī hadith 
commentaries, among others. This classification suggests that the inter-
pretation of hadiths is primarily related to the commentators’ legal and 
theological commitments and that the commentary reflects the herme-
neutical approach taken by the author and his audience. It may also point 
to the various texts that are commented on; for example, a commentary 
on a Shi‘i hadith collection. And yet, many works primarily concerned 
with legal matters also touch on issues of grammar and theology, just as 
a commentary authored by a Ḥanbalī may focus on matters that, on the 
surface, have little to do with Ḥanbalī law, and may relate more to Sufism 
or other schools of law.
Another way of classifying hadith commentary relates to the work’s 
format. This mode of classification primarily assesses the length of the 
commentary, in terms of dimension but also detail.10 While some com-
mentaries discuss each hadith of a collection, others provide only a partial 
commentary on a collection; that is, they discuss selected hadith, though 
they might still follow the arrangement of the collection.11 Such a selection 
(and its omissions) necessitates a study of the ways in which the traditions 
were chosen, and the possible motivations of the commentator. 
10 For instance, under this rubric, Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī’s (d. 852/1449) Fatḥ al-Bārī 
would be considered a detailed and comprehensive line-by-line commentary.
11 For instance, Badr al-Dīn al-Damāmīnī’s (d. 827/1424) Maṣābīḥ al-Jāmiʿ.

 These formal categories of length and comprehensiveness can be 
applied to the aforementioned types of commentary as related to disci-
pline and sectarian affiliation. A fourth category relates to the mode of 
transmission. A commentary performed orally can be viewed virtually, as 
a streaming video, or it can be experienced live during a hadith session 
(majlis al-ḥadīth, a gathering related to the publication, recitation or study 
of hadith). Similarly, written commentaries can be accessed in manuscript 
form, as edited texts or digitally. 
While the most common classifications are by discipline, sectarian affil-
iation and format, another possible method of classifying the varieties of 
hadith commentary relates to the kinds of texts that are commented upon. 
This is a rather technical approach and does not relate to discipline, sectar-
ian affiliation, content or the like. Rather, what matters is the type of textual 
material that is explained.12 
Regarding hadith collections, or hadith texts as a point of reference, 
this categorisation can be split into the following two groups. The first 
group consists of commentaries on identifiable hadith collections; that is, 
collections titled by their compilers who are usually known by name. The 
second group includes commentaries that treat a selection of traditions  
from various sources, or a general pool of hadiths.13 This group could include 
lectures, commentaries on a single hadith,14 or texts in a question-and-answer 
format. This last category particularly exemplifies the porous boundary of 
what constitutes a hadith commentary. Commentaries on abridgements 
(mukhtaṣars) or versifications of identifiable works straddle the two groups, 
since they are both identifiable, but are also, typically, an expression of the 
commentator’s selective editing choices.
The first group – those commentaries on collections that can be identi-
fied as separate works – can be further divided into primary and second-
ary collections. Primary collections are those in which the compiler is part 
of the original chain of transmission; these include the pre-canonical and 
canonical collections, both Sunni and Shi‘i. Secondary collections can 
12 This classification, developed by Friederike S. Schmidt, was a result of her survey on 
hadith commentaries in the Berlin manuscript catalogue of Wilhelm Ahlwardt (1889); 
her work was conducted as part of the research module ‘Macro-Perspective’ (supervised 
by Stefanie Brinkmann) at the Bibliotheca Arabica Project, Saxon Academy of Sciences 
and Humanities, Leipzig, Germany.
13 If we take the lexicographic gharīb al-ḥadīth subgenre as an example, then the gharīb 
al-ḥadīth commentary attributed to ʿAbd al-Qāhir al-Suhrawardī (d. 563/1168) on 
al-Baghawī’s Maṣābīḥ al-sunna would be considered part of the first group, while Abū 
ʿUbayd al-Qāsim b. Sallām’s (d. 223/837 or 224/838) Gharīb al-ḥadīth would belong to 
the second group, since Abū ʿUbayd collected traditions from various sources and does 
not refer to a reference text in the sense of a specific collection.
14 For instance, ʿAbd Allāh ibn Muḥammad Shinshawrī’s (d. 999/1591) Sharḥ ḥadīth 
Umm Zarʿ (Cairo: Dār al-Risāla, 2019).
6 
JOEL BLECHER AND STEFANIE BRINKMANN

  
INTRODUCTION 
7
be classified as later adaptations. The most prominent of these are post-
canonical works in which the compilers selected traditions from primary 
collections and arranged them as a new collection, on which numerous 
commentaries were composed.15 
We should reiterate that these various modes (and others not 
mentioned here) by which scholars classify hadith commentary often 
overlap and intersect, and no one mode is sufficient to describe the phe-
nomenon. But being explicit about the use of these competing modes 
of classification and not taking them for granted as fixed categories 
allows  scholars working on the academic study of hadith commentary 
to choose and develop the most advantageous frameworks for their own 
case studies.
In the past, those who sought to understand a hadith would have to seek 
out a shaykh who could deliver a commentary in a crowded study circle, 
or consult a manuscript in classical Arabic filled with his annotations,16 or 
free-standing comments. While hadith masters and handwritten codices 
can still be consulted today, now hadith commentaries are available 
in many languages and have been mass-produced in print, uploaded 
electronically and can be streamed on video on laptops and smartphones. 
And yet, even as the tradition of hadith commentary has navigated 
dramatic changes across time and place, it has also preserved, if selectively, 
important continuities and patterns of interpretation. 
Thus, following the abstract question of ‘What is a hadith commen-
tary?’, we are confronted with a rich constellation of questions that bear on 
the sociohistorical dimension of commentaries and the religious experi-
ences they elicit in historical practice. What intellectual milieu was a com-
mentary produced in; and what social, political and religious purposes 
did these commentaries serve for their communities? And, relatedly, what 
material rewards and religious excellences were at stake in the contesta-
tion over the direction of the tradition? What roles have patronage and the 
endowment of educational institutions played in sustaining the practice  
of hadith commentary? 
And how has the historical exclusion of women from positions of com-
mentarial authority on hadith (even while women have been included as 
authoritative transmitters of hadith in certain locales and during specific 
15 On so-called digest collections with truncated isnāds, see Brown, Ḥadith, 57–58. Examples 
include al-Ṣaghānī’s (d. 650/1252) Mashāriq al-anwār with traditions taken from the 
Ṣaḥīḥayn of al-Bukhārī and Muslim, or al-Baghawī’s (d. 510/1117 or 516/1122) Maṣābīḥ 
al-sunna, for which he chose traditions from the canonical collections and al-Dārimī’s  
(d. 255/869) Sunan.
16 Brinkmann, ‘Marginal Commentaries in Hadith Manuscripts’.

 eras) influenced the practice and audience of hadith commentary?17 How 
do constructs like ethnicity and race operate in the spaces and media where 
hadith commentary is practised?18 What other social dynamics and politi-
cal considerations were at work in specific scholarly communities engaged 
in the production of commentaries? 
Lastly, are there social, economic or political forces that might explain 
why some hadith compilations attracted numerous commentaries, while  
others withered in obscurity? And if the ‘medium is the message’, as Marshall  
McLuhan famously stated, what social and political messages has the  
medium of hadith commentary sent? And have these messages gone beyond 
any single explanation of a particular hadith or a select commentarial work? 
As Blecher argues in his introduction to Said the Prophet of God, the 
practice of hadith commentary cannot be reduced to competition over 
social capital and political power, though social and political forces are 
an important part of the puzzle. Stipends, tax advantages, prestige, status 
and fame were just some of the social and material rewards that could be 
attained in the setting of a hadith commentary session. It is important to 
understand the way commentary sessions allow seekers to resolve contra-
dictions in their understandings of Islam, and to perfect certain excellences 
of character modelled by Muhammad that Muslims sought to bring into 
their daily lives. Furthermore, the commentary sessions also allowed some 
seekers to attain ecstatic experiences and visions of Muhammad. This sug-
gests that the purpose of hadith commentary goes far beyond elucidating 
arcane grammatical points or advancing a hadith scholar’s career. In this 
way, scholars may benefit from analyses informed not only by hermeneu-
tics and history, but also by ‘thick’ phenomenologically informed ethno-
graphic descriptions of commentary practices.19
The academic study of hadith commentary requires a deep understanding 
of the genesis of hadith scholarship and its entrenchment with other disci-
plines in the various legal and theological schools, in addition to a compre-
hension of local and global political developments and social phenomena, in 
order to compare them across broad temporal and spatial distances. While 
17 Although women were active as hadith transmitters since the early period, their com-
mentarial activity has not been collected or passed on, apart from the notes in the texts 
of hadith by figures such as ʿĀʾisha. For the period prior to the twentieth century, women 
do not appear as the authors of commentaries, nor do we know of women that are 
quoted in hadith commentaries. For some examples of their possible peripheral partici-
pation in the exegetical activity of hadith, see Sayeed, Women and the Transmission of 
Knowledge. Compare Davidson, Carrying on the Tradition. Only in modern times have 
women started to compose hadith commentaries. In this respect, hadith commentary 
resembles the tafsīr tradition.
18 Blecher and Dubler, ‘Overlooking Race and Secularism’.
19 Blecher, Said the Prophet of God, 1–18.
8 
JOEL BLECHER AND STEFANIE BRINKMANN

  
INTRODUCTION 
9
some of these elements are addressed in this volume, the task ahead is so 
ambitious and the lacunae so gaping that some elements will have to await 
future research. In arranging our current volume chronologically rather than 
by theme, we hope to draw out the important continuities and changes in 
the practice of hadith commentary as commentators and their audiences  
of patrons and students have responded to local social and political realities 
and religious experiences.
A historical overview of the practice of hadith commentary has already been 
undertaken,20 thus, the aim of the present work is somewhat different. This 
book unfolds chronologically in two parts: ‘Formations and Developments 
in the Early and Middle Periods’ and ‘Modern Recollections and Reimagin-
ings’; this gives readers a sense of the development of this tradition over 
time and place. That said, readers should take care to note that the broad 
periodisation is not absolute, and contributions may cover more than 
one period. For instance, Stefanie Brinkmann’s article on gharīb al-ḥadīth 
begins with the third/ninth century and reconstructs the development of 
this genre through the Mamlūk period and into the twentieth century. Like-
wise, Youshaa Patel’s contribution on apocalyptic hadith is grounded in the 
Mamlūk period, but also addresses the use and reuse of these traditions in 
modern militant movements in the Middle East. The digital humanities proj-
ect devised by Bednarkiewicz, Qurboniev, and Van Den Bossche is included 
in the section on the modern period, but delves into the tradition’s past to 
uncover new insights. To that end, readers specialising in a single period 
may find it beneficial to consult chapters from both parts of this book.
In Part I, readers discover continuities and changes in several chapters 
that illuminate early Sunni and Shi‘i attempts to comment on hadith 
prior to the crystallisation of the genre during the middle periods. Stefanie 
Brinkmann examines the origin and development of the lexical commentary 
of gharīb al-ḥadīth. This genre is the earliest form of hadith commentary; 
thus reconstructing its historical development and exemplifying basic 
structural patterns lay the groundwork for the subsequent chapters. Ali 
Aghaei discusses Shi‘i intellectual thought and the hermeneutical approach to 
isolated traditions (akhbār al-āḥād) of the fifth-/eleventh-century luminary 
al-Sharīf al-Murtaḍā. Aghaei shows that al-Murtaḍā developed a distinct 
methodology to interpret hadith by applying a combination of Muʿtazilī  
and Shi‘i principles.
In the middle chapters of Part I, the volume explores the texts, peo-
ple, and practices that circulated in the context of the socially competitive 
post-classical Sunni and Shi‘i scholarly milieux, and examines the critical 
20 Blecher, Said the Prophet of God, 4–13; Blecher, ‘Ḥadīth Commentary’, in EI3; Karagözogğlu, 
‘Commentaries’.

 themes in mysticism, theology and law that are addressed across various 
regions of the Islamic world. Youshaa Patel surveys the interpretations of 
the hadith of al-ghurabāʾ (‘blessed are the strangers’) in a range of texts 
from the fourth/tenth to eighth/fourteenth century to show that modern 
militant interpretations of the hadith that stress its connection to jihad are 
a departure from the dominant ascetic virtues that Sufi interpreters asso-
ciated with it in earlier times. This chapter is a case study of how hadith 
commentary can be used to illuminate the contours of an important moral 
and religious concept in the evolving landscape of Islamic thought. Samer 
Dajani’s chapter takes up the influence of Sufism on the hadith commen-
tary tradition more broadly and more explicitly; in it he explores whether 
and to what extent we can speak of a Sufi hadith commentary tradition. In 
doing so, this chapter also represents the first attempt to collect and intro-
duce some of the most important works of hadith commentary written by 
Sufis and focusing on Sufi themes. 
Part I concludes first with Mohammad Gharaibeh’s chapter, which dis-
cusses the form of hadith commentary by examining Ibn Rajab al-Ḥanbalī’s 
extensive commentary on al-Nawawī’s renowned al-Arbaʿīn (Forty hadith). 
Gharaibeh shows that Ibn Rajab played with the form of the commentary 
in novel ways, in response to the intellectual and social context in which 
he was working. Lastly, Sajjad Rizvi’s chapter offers readers the first com-
prehensive introduction in English to the flowering of Shi‘i hadith com-
mentary in the Ṣafavid period. Rizvi depicts a tradition of commentaries in 
conflict with each other over the very nature of Shi‘i traditions. The Akhbārī  
commentaries were a return to scripture (as opposed to legal and theologi-
cal reasoning), while philosophers and mystics deployed hadith to confirm 
and corroborate their intellectual insights. The chapter concludes with  
a case study of how the notion of intellect (ʿaql) arising in hadith was  
understood by various Shi‘i interpreters in this period.
Part II, ‘Modern Recollections and Reimaginings’, addresses hadith com-
mentaries in the context of colonialism and the birth of the nation state in 
Turkey, Iran and India. Susan Gunasti’s chapter examines an early twentieth-
century effort – approved by the Turkish parliament – to complete a Turkish 
translation and commentary of Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī. In doing so, Gunasti illus-
trates how religious authority was articulated in the genre of hadith commen-
tary and in Islamic print culture, and how the legacy of Ottoman-era religious 
ideas and institutions endured in Turkish-language hadith commentaries 
after the fall of the Ottoman empire. Ali Mian’s chapter addresses modern 
South Asian debates on authority, authenticity and the question of unity and 
diversity. He examines modern Deobandī Ḥanafī commentators, and notes 
that they do not follow the lead of the twelfth-/eighteenth-century reformer 
and hadith scholar, Shāh Walī Allāh of Delhi (1114–1176/1703–1762), to rec-
oncile legal differences in the service of a unified, ecumenical approach to 
10 
JOEL BLECHER AND STEFANIE BRINKMANN

  
INTRODUCTION 
11
the normative order. Rather, Deobandī Ḥanafī scholars used both ‘content-
based’ (matn) and ‘transmission-based’ (isnād) forms of criticism to display 
their interpretive excellences and to defend the Ḥanafī tradition against criti-
cism from Salafī detractors. Next, Shadi Nafisi brings to light the exegetical 
work of Muḥammad Ḥusayn Ṭabāṭabāʾī (d. 1981), a paragon of modern Shi‘i 
thought in twentieth-century Iran. Nafisi examines how Ṭabāṭabāʾī assesses 
the authority of a given hadith by paying particular attention to the matn of 
the hadith and its relationship to the Qur’an. This opens the possibility of 
intertextual and comparative work that crosses the boundaries between sharḥ 
al-ḥadīth and tafsīr al-Qurʾān. 
The last chapter, by Maroussia Bednarkiewicz, Aslisho Qurboniev and 
Goowart Van Den Bossche, breaks new ground by modelling the poten-
tial of large digital corpora for the analysis of hadith commentary. These 
authors show that the tool of text reuse particularly (i.e. counting citations 
and excerpts of commentaries across generations of the textual tradition) 
speaks volumes about commentators’ processes and their relationship to 
their predecessors. 
The book closes with Joel Blecher’s afterword entitled ‘More Com-
ments, Further Questions’, in which he explores the themes of continuity 
and change in the hadith commentary tradition across time and place, and 
points to avenues that could be fruitfully pursued in future studies.
Finally, we must add that even as accessibility to hadith commentaries has 
increased over the past centuries, many catalogued manuscripts that best 
attest to the hadith commentary tradition remain unedited; this is in addi-
tion to what must be a bevy of uncatalogued, unknown or lost material. 
Many spaces in which contemporary hadith commentary are delivered live 
are likewise inaccessible to researchers due to political instability, travel 
restrictions and gender segregation, among other factors. Therefore, our 
understanding of the hadith commentary tradition is preliminary and will 
require revision and adjustment as the full corpus of texts comes to light. 
It is our hope, then, that this first collection of scholarly essays will not be 
the last. In an echo of the title of this book’s afterword, we hope that this 
volume will not mark the final word in this field, but will spur further ques-
tions and scholarly commentary. 
Bibliography
Assmann, Jan and Burkhard Gladigow (eds). Text und Kommentar. Archäologie 
der literarischen Kommunikation IV. Munich: Wilhelm Fink Verlag, 1995.
Blecher, Joel. ‘Hadith Commentary.’ In Andrew Rippin (ed.), Oxford Bibliogra-
phies in Islamic Studies. New York: Oxford University Press, 2016. Available at 
doi: 10.1093/obo/9780195390155–0192.

 Blecher, Joel. ‘Ḥadīth Commentary’, in EI3, 4:61–68.
Blecher, Joel. Said the Prophet of God: Hadith Commentary across a Millennium. 
Oakland: University of California Press, 2018.
Blecher, Joel and Josh Dubler. ‘Overlooking Race and Secularism in Muslim Phil-
adelphia.’ In Vincent Lloyd and Jonathan S. Kahn (eds), Race and Secularism 
in America, 122–150. New York: Columbia University Press, 2016. 
Brinkmann, Stefanie. ‘Marginal Commentaries in Hadith Manuscripts.’ In Marcus 
Stock and Christine Lechtermann (eds), Practices in Commentary, 6–44. Frank-
furt a.M. 2020 [special issue of Zeitsprünge, Forschungen zur Frühen Neuzeit, 
Sonderband 24]. 
Brown, Jonathan A. C. Hadith: Muhammad’s Legacy in the Medieval and Modern 
World. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009.
Burge, Stephan R. ‘Reading between the Lines: The Compilation of Ḥadīṯ in the 
Authorial Voice.’ Arabica 58 (2011): 168–197.
al-Damāmīnī, Badr al-Dīn. Maṣābīh al-Jāmiʿ, ed. Nūr al-Dīn T. ālib, 10 vols  
(Qatar: Wizārat al-Awqāf, 2009).
Davidson, Garrett. Carrying on the Tradition: A Social and Intellectual History of 
Hadith Transmission Across a Thousand Years. Islamic History and Civilisation, 
vol. 160. Leiden and Boston: Brill, 2020.
Gladigow, Burkhard. ‘Der Kommentar als Hypothek des Textes. Systematische 
Erwägungen und historische Analysen.’ In Jan Assmann and Burkhard Gladi-
gow (eds), Text und Kommentar. Archäologie der literarischen Kommunikation 
IV, 35–49. Munich: Wilhelm Fink Verlag, 1995. 
Gutas, Dimitri. ‘Aspects of Literary Form and Genre in Arabic Logical Works.’ In 
Charles Burnett (ed.), Glosses and Commentaries on Aristotelian Logical Texts: 
The Syriac, Arabic, and Medieval Latin Traditions, 31–43. London: The Warburg 
Institute, 1993. 
Karagözogğlu, Mustafa Macit. ‘Commentaries.’ In Daniel Brown (ed.), The Wiley 
Blackwell Concise Companion to the Hadith, 159–186. Hoboken, NJ: John 
Wiley & Sons, 2020.
Lit, Eric van. ‘Commentary and Commentary Tradition: The Basic Terms for 
Understanding Islamic Intellectual History.’ Mélanges de l’Institut Dominicain 
d’Études Orientales (MIDEO) 32 (2017): 3–26.
Lucas, Scott. ‘An Efficacious Invocation Inscribed on the Dome of the Rock:  
Literary and Epigraphic Evidence for a First-Century ḥadīth.’ Journal of Near 
Eastern Studies 76, no. 2 (2017): 215–230.
Sayeed, Asma. Women and the Transmission of Knowledge in Islam. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2013.
Schoeler, Gregor. ‘Text und Kommentar in der klassisch-islamischen Tradition.’ In 
Jan Assmann and Burkhard Gladigow (eds), Text und Kommentar. Archäologie 
der literarischen Kommunikation IV, 279–292. Munich: Wilhelm Fink Verlag, 
1995.
Shinshawrī, ʿAbd Allāh ibn Muḥammad. Sharḥ ḥadīth Umm Zarʿ. Cairo: Dār 
al-Risāla, 2019.
12 
JOEL BLECHER AND STEFANIE BRINKMANN

 PART I
Formations and Developments in  
the Early and Middle Periods

 
 CHAPTER 1
Between Philology and Hadith Criticism: 
The Genre of Sharḥ Gharīb al-Ḥadīth
Stefanie Brinkmann*
Introduction
Some time at the beginning of the third/ninth century in the eastern  
Iranian province of Khurāsān, the future caliph al-Maʾmūn argued with 
one of the earliest authors of a gharīb al-ḥadīth book, Naḍr b. Shumayl 
(d. c. 204/820), about the vocalisation of a word in a hadith (ḥadīth, pl. 
aḥādīth). In the version of the hadith as it was transmitted by Hushaym b. 
Bashīr b. al-Qāsim (d. 183/799), the word was vocalised with a fatḥa (a); in 
another version, this one transmitted by ʿAwf al-Aʿrābī (d. 146/763–764), 
it was read with a kasra (i). Naḍr considered the version with a kasra (i)  
to be the correct version and gave Hushaym’s dialect as the reason for his 
different vocalisation: wa-hādha laḥn Hushaym.1
In the early Islamic empire, understanding differences in vocalisation 
and the meaning of unfamiliar or unusual words was an essential require-
ment for the proper reading of the Islamic sources, Qur’an and hadith alike. 
Again and again in later centuries, it was stressed that a proper knowledge 
of the Arabic language should precede any examination of the content of a 
text. Majd al-Dīn b. al-Athīr (d. 606/1210), author of the famous and widely 
disseminated al-Nihāya fī gharīb al-ḥadīth wa-l-athar, stated that in order 
to understand hadith properly, one must first comprehend its language 
(lit., alfāẓ),2 and second, its meanings (maʿānī). ‘And without a doubt, the 
 * This research has been carried out within the Bibliotheca Arabica Project, based at the 
Saxon Academy of Sciences and Humanities in Leipzig (www.saw-leipzig.de/bibliotheca-
arabica). I would like to thank (in alphabetical order) the following persons for their sup-
port: Joel Blecher, Hannah-Lena Hagemann, Boris Liebrenz, Nadine Loehr, Friederike 
Schmidt, Anne Weber and Ali Zaherinezhad.
 1 Al-Zubaydī, Ṭabaqāt, 55–56.
 2 The term lafẓ, pl. alfāẓ, can range in meaning from ‘phoneme’, to ‘word’ or ‘expression’. In 
this chapter I usually translate it as ‘word’, but note that lafẓ can have other meanings as well.

 16 
STEFANIE BRINKMANN
knowledge of its words comes first.’3 In his sixth chapter of the Muqaddima, 
on knowledge and teaching (al-ʿilm wa-l-taʿlīm), Ibn Khaldūn (d. 808/ 
1406) points out that ‘the study (naẓar) of the Qur’ān and Ḥadīth neces-
sarily has to be preceded by the sciences of language (ʿulūm al-lisāniyya) 
because it [i.e. naẓar] is based on them’.4 
Issues of vocalisation and the proper understanding of words and 
expressions, as well as the complexity of grammatical structures, were of 
key importance in the early period of the Islamic empire (and beyond). 
With the Qur’anic revelation and the emergence of an Islamic state in the 
first/seventh to second/eighth centuries, the Arabic language became the 
underpinning of religion, politics and administration, and an integrative 
element in future multi-ethnic and multi-lingual Islamic culture.5 Thus, 
collecting linguistic data and standardising the Arabic language (including 
orthography) was of utmost importance during the first three to four cen-
turies, when major works in the fields of grammar (naḥw) and lexicography 
(lugha) were composed. These ambitions were aimed at the standardisa-
tion and control of the Arabic language in the Islamic empire, as a basis for 
administration and trade, and as the official language of communication, 
as much as they were focused on a religious agenda, that is, for recording 
(and explaining) the religious scriptures. Qur’anic Arabic and its cultural 
environment were considered an ideal model, and accordingly, the major 
sources for the standardisation of Arabic were the Qur’an itself, pre-Islamic 
poetry, the language of tribes from the central Arabian Peninsula6 and, to  
a lesser extent, hadith. 
Among these main sources for linguistic data collecting, hadith was per-
haps the most controversial. The reasons were manifold. Not all transmit-
ters were native speakers of Arabic, and thus their transmissions carried the 
potential threat of corrupt language. Since hadith transmitters had been 
active in different geographical regions for many decades, their wide-rang-
ing network was much less limited and controllable as a linguistic source 
than the Qur’an. Furthermore, the transmission of hadith was not neces-
sarily verbatim but was sometimes based on content (riwāya bi-l-maʿnā); 
this led to different versions of the same text. Hence, some grammarians 
and lexicographers were hesitant to use hadith as a source, while others 
were more comfortable doing so. The grammarian Sībawayhi (d. 180/796),  
 3 Ibn al-Athīr, al-Nihāya, 3.
 4 Ibn Khaldūn, Muqaddima, 2:172. 
 5 On Arabic and Arab identity from the early to the contemporary period, see Suleiman, 
Arabic in the Fray, and his article ‘Ideology’. 
 6 The idea of a ‘pure Arabic’ even involved excluding certain tribes as sources for  
‘language data mining’, namely, tribes who, based on their geographic settlement area, 
were thought to use Arabic corrupted by neighbouring cultures; Suleiman, Arabic in 
the Fray, 52.

  
BETWEEN PHILOLOGY AND HADITH CRITICISM 
17
for example, quotes only a very few traditions, compared to his teacher, the 
lexicographer al-Khalīl (d. 175/791), who cites numerous hadiths in his 
Kitāb al-ʿAyn. Despite this reluctance to use hadith as a linguistic source, by 
the late second/eighth century scholars had started to collect obscure words 
in hadith. At times these oddities were illustrated and documented with 
further evidence, such as with cross-references to poetic verses (shawāhid). 
By explaining such obscure words, expressions and different vocalisations, 
gharīb al-ḥadīth represents the first stage of hadith commentary, a stage that 
took place long before the extensive, multi-thematic hadith commentaries 
were composed. Notably, in gharīb al-ḥadīth texts the explanation of words 
is usually expressed with either or both of the two terms later used for com-
mentary: fassara (tafsīr) or sharaḥa (sharḥ).
This chapter presents gharīb al-ḥadīth as a nucleus for the hadith com-
mentary that was to come and reconstruct its lines of transmission for the 
subsequent centuries. Although its linguistic data had been absorbed by 
the two traditions of lexicography and hadith sciences, gharīb al-ḥadīth 
books continued to be written far into the middle period and beyond – a 
fact much neglected by contemporary research. After a discussion of the 
issue of defining gharīb al-ḥadīth and the state of research, I examine the 
genre under two main rubrics: first, I take a historical approach and briefly 
sketch the development of gharīb al-ḥadīth and concentrate on the authors’ 
provenance and the centres of production in a historical context; second, I 
examine the arrangement of the books, specifically as it relates to passages 
that deal with the names of beverages. For this article, I consulted many 
reference works and historical sources in order to register gharīb al-ḥadīth 
works that are attributed to specific authors.7 The process of identifying 
and attributing a gharīb al-ḥadīth book to a particular author poses a few 
challenges: First, many books have not been preserved or are not accessible 
as manuscripts. Thus, one sometimes must accept an attribution without 
being able to consult the text. Second, reference works and sources list 
partly diverging titles, or the title referred to remains uncertain.8 Third, 
 7 Among them, I collected sources and reference works from EI2 and EI3; C. Brockelmann’s 
Geschichte der arabischen Litteratur (GAL); Fuat Sezgin’s Geschichte des arabischen 
Schrifttums (GAS); Kaḥḥāla, Muʿjam; al-Ziriklī, al-Aʿlām; [Ibn] al-Nadīm, al-Fihrist; 
al-Zubaydī, Ṭabaqāt; al-Qiftī, Inbāh; al-Fihris al-Shāmil; the muqaddima of al-Khaṭṭābī, 
Gharīb al-ḥadīth; the muqaddima of Ibn al-Athīr, al-Nihāya; and al-Ḥibshī [al-Ḥabashī], 
Jāmiʿ al-shurūḥ. Among Shīʿī books, I have utilised al-Ṭihrānī, al-Dharīʿa. The sources I 
referred to include more than eighty gharīb al-ḥadīth titles attributed to different authors 
from the second/eighth to the twentieth century.
 8 For example, the attribution of Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī’s (d. 852/1449) Gharīb al-ḥadīth is 
uncertain. His inclusion in the list of gharīb al-ḥadīth authors is based on the attribution of 
a gharīb work to him in Kashf al-ẓunūn (1:464, where the title is given as Taqrīb al-gharīb); 
a manuscript listed in the Fihris al-Shāmil, 1133 (where the title is given as Gharīb  
al-lugha fī Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī); and the list of authors in Demirel, ʿUlūm al-ḥadīth, 136  

 there is the problem of how to define a gharīb al-ḥadīth work. Boundaries 
between related genres are sometimes fluid, especially regarding works on 
mushkil al-ḥadīth or proper multi-thematic commentaries.9 
Definition
The term gharīb can apply to a specific type of isnād (chain of transmission), 
and to the philological issue of rare and obscure words and expressions. As 
a category of isnād, gharīb denotes a tradition with a limited corroboration, 
that is, a hadith in which one single authority is transmitted for at least 
one link in the chain. Thus, such a hadith is part of the āḥād category, as 
opposed to mutawātir hadiths, which are transmitted by a larger number 
of reporters. As a single-strand hadith, gharīb is often used synonymously 
with fard.10 The term gharīb can also refer to the text of a tradition (matn) 
as a unique text (version). The authoritative value of such gharīb traditions 
has been widely discussed, particularly in relation to which context (e.g. 
law or creed) such terms may be of value.11 In this chapter, I do not con-
sider gharīb as a category of the isnād, rather I discuss it as a lexical term 
that denotes uncommon and rare words. It can be used synonymously  
with nādir (pl. nawādir; rare), shādhdh (pl. shawādhdh; anomalous), or 
sometimes ḥūshī or waḥshī (odd, unusual, vulgar). To varying degrees, 
(where the title is given as Gharīb al-ḥadīth al-Bukhārī). The title Taqrīb al-gharīb is 
mentioned, e.g. in al-Sakhāwī, al-Jawāhir wa-l-durar, 677, and by ʿAllūsh, al-Jāmiʿ, 21. 
Whereas al-Sakhāwī cites this as a commentary on al-Bukhārī, Isḥāq, Muʿjam, 296, 
relates it to the Qur’an. We cannot be certain if the references above are citations of 
the same text, but we might assume that this gharīb al-ḥadīth work, or one of those 
mentioned above (if indeed they represent different texts), is not itself a book but the 
fifth chapter of Ibn Ḥajar’s Hadi al-sārī, which is the introduction of his commentary 
entitled Fatḥ al-Bārī (which is a commentary on al-Bukhārī’s Ṣaḥīḥ). This chapter is 
entitled ‘al-Faṣl al-khāmis fī siyāq mā fī al-kitāb min al-alfāẓ al-gharība ʿalā al-tartīb 
al-ḥurūf mashrūḥan’ (Ibn Ḥajar, Hadi al-sārī, muqaddima Fatḥ al-Bārī, 73–208). 
 9 Such a borderline case is, for example, Ibn Qutayba’s (d. 276/889) Taʾwīl mukhtalif 
al-ḥadīth. As a counterpart to his Taʾwīl mushkil al-Qurʾān, it deals specifically with 
problems in lexicography, though his main aim is to argue against hadith-critical atti-
tudes of Muslim groups, above all Muʿtazilīs. Another example would be Ibn Furāk’s 
(d. 406/1015) Mushkil al-ḥadīth (with its variant titles), which includes lexicographic 
explanations but focuses on issues of theology. A third borderline case is Qāḍī ʿIyāḍ’s 
(d. 544/1149) Mashāriq al-anwār, which is a commentary on the Ṣaḥīḥayn and Mālik’s 
Muwaṭṭaʾ (with the aforementioned focus); for a brief overview, see https://www.
sifatusafwa.com/en/hadith-collections-explanations/mashariq-al-anwar-ala-sahih-al-
athar-al-qadi-iyyad.html (accessed 26 October 2022). The third borderline case goes 
beyond the strict treatment of lexicographic problems and thus is an example of a fluid 
border between gharīb al-ḥadīth and a multi-thematic commentary. 
10 Al-Ṭībī, al-Khulāṣa, 56–57.
11 Brown, Hadith, 94–95, 235.
18 
STEFANIE BRINKMANN

  
BETWEEN PHILOLOGY AND HADITH CRITICISM 
19
works on gharīb are collections of rare, obscure and foreign words, dia-
lectic variants, unfamiliar synonyms and differences in pronunciation and 
vocalisation. The works might also extend to rare idiomatic expressions  
or unusual syntactic structures.12 Gharīb books list monothematic vocab-
ularies or explain words from the Qur’an (gharīb al-Qurʾān) or hadith 
(gharīb al-ḥadīth). 
Over time, gharīb al-ḥadīth came to be integrated into both lexicog-
raphy (that is, dictionaries) and hadith sciences. In lexicography, gharīb 
al-ḥadīth works fell under the category of topical vocabularies (mubaw-
wab), which were quite popular during the early centuries of Islam, offer-
ing vocabularies on topics such as camels, humans, weapons or the rain 
and other natural phenomena.13 The data from these collections came to be 
integrated into multi-thematic dictionaries, such as Abū ʿUbayd al-Qāsim b. 
Sallām’s (d. 223/837 or 224/838) al-Gharīb al-muṣannaf and Abū al-Ḥasan 
ʿAlī b. [Aḥmad] b. Ismāʿīl b. Sīda’s (d. 458/1066) al-Mukhaṣṣaṣ, and dic-
tionaries arranged by formal criteria (mujannas), such as Muḥammad b. 
Mukarram b. Manẓūr’s (d. 711/1311) Lisān al-ʿArab. In the field of hadith, 
data from gharīb al-ḥadīth collections were useful in the critical analysis 
of a tradition’s text (matn) in the wider context of hadith sciences (ʿulūm 
al-ḥadīth) and hadith criticism (jarḥ wa-taʿdīl); the data also became an 
essential part of the developing genre of hadith commentary. Nearly all 
hadith commentaries include some philological information on lexicog-
raphy and grammar; in fact, philological elements usually represent the 
first part of a commentary section. As far as we can determine at this time 
(given the limited research that has been dedicated to this phenomenon 
thus far), notes on lexicography and grammar are the dominant marginal 
(and interlinear) annotations in manuscripts of hadith collections. Thus, 
lexicography (and grammar) constitutes the nucleus from which further 
commentary and exegetical activity arose. 
This oscillation between lexicography and hadith sciences is reflected in 
the various classifications of the genre. Aḥmad al-Anṣārī, the seventh-/thir-
teenth-century cataloguer of the Ashrafiyya library in Damascus, assigned 
works of gharīb al-ḥadīth to the thematic category of transmitted sciences/
hadith.14 And in the endowment list of the Damascene Ḥanbalī scholar  
Ibn ʿAbd al-Hādī (d. 909/1503), gharīb al-ḥadīth books are also clearly 
considered part of a hadith-oriented library, even though few volumes  
12 Baalbaki, Arabic Lexicographical Tradition, on gharīb in general: 36–45, especially 
84–99. In some cases, gharīb works contain familiar words, which were apparently 
included because of their unusual usage in specific contexts. 
13 On these topic-centred vocabularies, see Naṣṣār, Maʿājim; Baalbaki, Arabic Lexico-
graphical Tradition, 132ff. 
14 Hirschler, Medieval Damascus. 

 are dedicated to the topic.15 The palace library of the Ottoman ruler Bayezid 
II (r. 886–918/1481–1512), for which the librarian ʿAṭūfī compiled the cata-
logue in 908/1502–3, differs from these two libraries in Syria.16 In Bayezid’s 
library, gharīb al-ḥadīth books were kept in the section on Arabic philology; 
namely, with books on Arabic lexicography and linguistics. In the fourth/
tenth century, the bibliographer Ibn al-Nadīm (d. 380/990) listed works 
on gharīb al-ḥadīth in the philological section (al-maqāla al-thāniyya),17 
while in the Muqaddima Ibn Khaldūn (d. 808/1406) addressed the issue 
of gharīb al-ḥadīth in the chapter on the sciences of hadith.18 We find such 
shifting classifications throughout the centuries; indeed, they mirror the 
multifaceted genre of gharīb al-ḥadīth.
The State of Research
The gharīb al-ḥadīth genre has received comparatively little attention. To 
my knowledge, no monograph on the subject has  yet been written in a 
Western language.19 With regard to other types of publications that treat 
gharīb al-ḥadīth in the context of other disciplines in Arabic and Islamic 
studies (e.g. works on lexicography, hadith, etc.) in Western languages, 
the genre has received more attention in the field of lexicography than in 
books related to hadith, since gharīb al-ḥadīth is but one part of the larger 
gharīb strand of scholarship. In such works of lexicography, the stress 
is on citing (known) authors and their texts, explaining the arrange-
ment of the lexicographic material, and describing the interrelations of  
these works. 
In contrast to the state of research in Western languages, publications 
in Arabic are more numerous, though relevant scholarship only increased 
significantly after the year 2000. Many studies also discuss a single gharīb 
al-ḥadīth author and his method in organising the gharīb material; clearly 
most works are dedicated to Ibn al-Athīr’s (d. 606/1210) al-Nihāya fī gharīb  
al-ḥadīth, and fewer to Abū ʿUbayd al-Qāsim b. Sallām and Ibn Qutayba 
15 Hirschler, Monument.
16 Necipoğlu, Kafadar, Fleischer (eds), Treasures of Knowledge. See the articles by Recep 
Gürkan Göktaş for hadith, and Tahera Qutbuddin’s contribution on Arabic philology.
17 Following authors from the Basran and Kufan schools, Ibn al-Nadīm has a chapter 
called ‘Tasmiyyat al-kutub al-muʾallafa fī gharīb al-ḥadīth’, Fihrist, 1:270–271. It is  
followed by the chapter on nawādir. Note that books on gharīb al-Qurʾān are part of  
the section on the Qur’an and the Qur’anic sciences (ʿulūm al-Qurʾān).
18 Ibn Khaldūn, Muqaddima, 177ff. 
19 The first edition of the Encyclopaedia of Islam did not include a separate entry on 
gharīb al-ḥadīth; EI2 has a short general entry on gharīb by S. A. Bonebakker; EI3, still 
in its beginning stages, does not yet have an entry on gharīb, gharīb al-ḥadīth or gharīb 
al-Qurʾān. 
20 
STEFANIE BRINKMANN

  
BETWEEN PHILOLOGY AND HADITH CRITICISM 
21
(d. 276/889).20 Thus, research is often based on known published works 
from the third/ninth to the sixth/twelfth century, with later adaptations of 
gharīb works rarely mentioned. General studies on ʿulūm al-ḥadīth (hadith 
sciences) in Arabic include a chapter on gharīb al-ḥadīth, since it repre-
sents an essential part of reading, critically assessing and analysing the text 
of a tradition. In the same vein, and like publications in Western languages, 
Arabic works in the field of lexicography include a chapter on the genre of 
gharīb al-ḥadīth.21 New and revised compilations of ‘classical’ works and 
indices are still being published today.22 
The common approach of listing authors and titles chronologically and 
describing the arrangement of the linguistic material and the interrelation 
of the books (both in Arabic and Western languages) neglects three notable 
aspects. First, regardless of whether the secondary literature is dedicated to 
lexicography or hadith, most studies by far are restricted to ‘Sunnī’ authors; 
that is, the gharīb material is collected from Sunnī hadith and refers to 
traditions from the Prophet, his Companions (ṣaḥāba) and their Suc-
cessors (tābiʿūn). Books on gharīb al-ḥadīth from the Shīʿī Imāmī tradi-
tion are usually not mentioned. For example, the two scholars who have 
written survey chapters on gharīb al-ḥadīth, R. Baalbaki and Ḥ. Naṣṣār, 
do not mention the Twelver Shīʿī traditionist Ibn Bābawayh (Ibn Bābūya 
al-Qummī, d. 381/991), who is said to have written a gharīb al-ḥadīth work. 
Ibn Bābawayh’s book is supposed to be a collection of difficult vocabulary 
from traditions attributed to the Prophet and to the first Shīʿī Imam, ʿAlī 
b. Abī Ṭālib (gharīb al-ḥadīth al-nabī wa-amīr al-muʾminīn).23 Apart from 
Ibn Bābawayh’s book, the other Imāmī gharīb al-ḥadīth studies were writ-
ten recently, in the period from the eleventh/seventeenth to the twentieth 
century. The Ṣafavid period (907–1135/1501–1722) is thus a clear start-
ing point for the production of Shīʿī gharīb al-ḥadīth, and in this sense, 
gharīb al-ḥadīth and Imāmī hadith commentary share a common origin.24 
As recently as 1421/2000–2001, Ḥusayn al-Ḥasanī al-Bīrjandī published 
a gharīb al-ḥadīth work on the collection entitled Bihār al-anwār by the 
Ṣafavid scholar Muḥammad Bāqir al-Majlisī (d. 1111/1700);25 but it should 
be stressed that Shīʿī scholars used the known ‘Sunnī’ gharīb al-ḥadīth 
books in their studies throughout the centuries.26 
20 See, for example, Shalabī, al-Khaṭṭābī; Zaydī, Manhaj Abī ʿUbayd; al-Suḥaybānī, 
al-Taʾwīl fī gharīb al-ḥadīth; Badr al-Dīn, Ibn al-Athīr al-muḥaddith.
21 See Naṣṣār, al-Muʿjam.
22 ʿAllūsh, al-Jāmiʿ; Mīrah, Fihris gharīb al-ḥadīth.
23 Al-Ṭihrānī, al-Dharīʿa, 16:46.
24 See Chapter 6 in the present volume.
25 This book is not mentioned in Demirel’s study of Sunnī and Shīʿī hadith sciences, which 
lists the most recent publications up to the nineteenth century. 
26 See Chapter 2.

 A second aspect that is neglected in most publications on gharīb 
al-ḥadīth concerns the social and political context of production. Who 
were the authors of these gharīb al-ḥadīth works? What regions did they 
come from and what were their fields of study? What were the centres of 
production for gharīb al-ḥadīth works? A third neglected issue reflects a 
common narrative in the history of Arabic literature; namely, the focus 
on the early Islamic period to the seventh/thirteenth century (and pos-
sibly including the eighth/fourteenth century), and the neglect of works 
from later centuries (apart from the ‘modern period’). Studies on hadith 
literature produced in the middle period have only recently become more 
vivid, as is reflected in the growing interest in the commentary genre. 
Hence, most studies on gharīb al-ḥadīth end with Ibn al-Athīr’s al-Nihāya. 
Naṣṣār mentions the two abridgements (mukhtaṣar) of Ibn al-Athīr’s  
(d. 606/1210) al-Nihāya by Jalāl al-Dīn al-Suyūṭī (d. 911/1505) and ʿAlī b. 
ʿAbd al-Malik al-Hindī al-Muttaqī (d. 975/1567), while ʿAllūsh adds Ibn 
Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī’s (d. 852/1449) Taqrīb al-gharīb.27 
The History of the Genre
It is not entirely clear who wrote the first gharīb al-ḥadīth collection. Often 
(for example, by Ibn al-Athīr),28 Abū ʿUbayda Maʿmar b. al-Muthannā  
(d. 209/824) is credited with being the first. In his Gharīb al-ḥadīth, 
al-Khaṭṭābī (d. 386/996 or 388/998) refers to Abū ʿUbayd al-Qāsim b. Sallām 
as the first author of such a work,29 while Naṣṣār points out that it may have 
been Abū ʿAdnān ʿAbd al-Raḥmān b. ʿAbd al-Aʿlā al-Sulamī (d. c. 250/864).30 
While Abū ʿUbayd’s Gharīb al-hadīth has survived,31 as far as we know, many 
of the early works are lost. According to Ibn al-Athīr, Abū ʿUbayda Maʿmar 
b. al-Muthannā’s Gharīb al-ḥadīth was a small booklet consisting of a few 
pages. Ibn al-Athīr mentions two reasons for its limited length; since it was 
the first book written in this genre, the author could not build on earlier 
material (subsequent authors tended to integrate their predecessors’ data 
and added to it, so collections grew over time). Second, Abū ʿUbayda’s con-
temporaries were still familiar with the vocabulary of the first/seventh and 
second/eighth centuries, meaning that fewer words and expressions required  
27 See n. 8. Naṣṣār, al-Muʿjam, 51–52; ʿAllūsh, al-Jāmiʿ, 21.
28 Ibn al-Athīr, al-Nihāya, 1:5. 
29 Al-Khaṭṭābī, Gharīb al-ḥadīth, 1:47.
30 Naṣṣār, al-Muʿjam, 1:42; Baalbaki, Arabic Lexicographical Tradition, 72.
31 The Fihris al-Shāmil lists thirteen manuscripts (1131). On the Leiden manuscript as early 
preserved evidence for Iraqī scholarship, see Brockopp, Muhammad’s Heirs, 151–154; 
Witkam, ‘The Oldest Known Dated Arabic Manuscript’; on the reception of this work, see 
also Lecomte, ‘A propos de la résurgence des ouvrages d’Ibn Qutayba’.
22 
STEFANIE BRINKMANN

  
BETWEEN PHILOLOGY AND HADITH CRITICISM 
23
explanation.32 Following these earliest collections was al-Naḍr b. Shumayl 
al-Māzanī’s (d. between 203/818 and 204/820) Gharīb al-ḥadīth, of which  
no manuscript has been preserved, as far as we know today. 
The best known, most quoted and best preserved gharīb al-ḥadīth works 
up to and including that of Ibn al-Athīr are the following.
 1.  Abū ʿUbayd al-Qāsim b. Sallām (d. 223/837 or 224/838): Gharīb 
al-ḥadīth.
 2.  The following works by Ibn Qutayba (d. 276/889): Gharīb 
al-ḥadīth; Iṣlāḥ al-ghalaṭ fī gharīb al-ḥadīth li-Abī ʿUbayd al-Qāsim 
b. Sallām; al-Masāʾil wa-l-ajwiba fī al-ḥadīth wa-l-tafsīr; Taʾwīl 
mukhtalif al-ḥadīth.
 3. Abū Isḥāq al-Ḥarbī (d. 285/898): Gharīb al-ḥadīth.
 4.  Abū al-Qāsim Thābit (father, d. 313/925 or 314/926) and Abū 
Muḥammad Qāsim b. Thābit (son, d. 302/914) al-Saraqusṭī: 
al-Dalāʾil fī gharīb al-ḥadīth, or al-Dalāʾil fī sharḥ mā aghfala Abū 
ʿUbayd wa-Ibn Qutayba min gharīb al-ḥadith.
 5.  Abū Sulaymān al-Khaṭṭābī (d. 386/996 or 388/998): Gharīb 
al-ḥadīth.
 6.  Abū ʿUbayd al-Harawī (d. 401/1011): Kitāb al-Gharībayn fī 
al-Qurʾān wa-l-ḥadīth. 
 7. Al-Zamakhsharī (d. 538/1144): al-Fāʾiq fī gharīb al-ḥadīth.
 8.  Qāḍī ʿIyāḍ (d. 544/1149): Mashāriq al-anwār ʿalā ṣaḥīḥ/ṣiḥāḥ 
al-āthār.
 9. Ibn al-Jawzī (d. 597/1201): Gharīb al-ḥadīth.
10.  Ibn al-Athīr (d. 606/1210): al-Nihāya fī gharīb al-ḥadīth wa-l-athar.
Regardless of the identity of the first scholar to collect linguistic data 
from hadith, Abū ʿUbayd’s Gharīb al-ḥadīth was certainly a model for 
later works.33 As a lexicographer, Abū ʿUbayd also wrote a topical diction-
ary, his al-Gharīb al-muṣannaf. The second constitutive gharīb work is Ibn 
Qutayba’s Gharīb al-ḥadīth. Ibn al-Athīr refers to these two books by Abū 
ʿUbayd and Ibn Qutayba, together with al-Khaṭṭābī’s Gharīb al-ḥadīth, 
as ‘the foundations (lit. ummuhāt) of the books [of this genre]’.34 Later 
authors basically built upon these early works, revising, criticising and/or 
complementing their content. Some switched from an isnād-based struc-
ture that follows the musnad type of hadith collections to an alphabetical 
system, and some differed in the material adduced, but these later works 
can still be characterised, principally, as completions and critical revisions.  
32 Ibn al-Athīr, al-Nihāya, 1:5.
33 See also Ibn al-Athīr, al-Nihāya, 6. 
34 Ibn al-Athīr, al-Nihāya, 8.

 The tradition of gharīb al-ḥadīth reached its apex with Ibn al-Athīr’s 
al-Nihāya. After Ibn al-Athīr it seems that the constitutive linguistic data 
had been collected, and in the seventh/thirteenth century the production 
of gharīb al-ḥadīth slowed down. From the seventh/thirteenth century on, 
two types of gharīb al-ḥadīth books dominate: first, gharīb works on post-
canonical hadith collections, such as sixth-/twelfth-century ʿAbd al-Qāhir 
al-Suhrawardī on al-Baghawī’s Maṣābīḥ al-sunna, or Yūsuf b. ʿAbdallāh 
al-Urmayūnī (d. 958/1551) on al-Suyūṭī’s al-Jāmiʿ al-ṣaghīr; and second, 
adaptations, such as abridgements (mukhtaṣar) or versifications (naẓm). 
Shīʿī collections follow a different timeline regarding gharīb al-ḥadīth. 
After the gharīb al-ḥadīth work attributed to the fourth-/tenth-century scholar 
Ibn Bābawayh, there was a gap of several centuries before new gharīb works 
were written in the eleventh/seventeenth century. At that point, Fakhr al-Dīn 
ʿAlī b. Muḥammad al-Najafī al-Ṭurayḥī (d. 1085/1674)35 wrote his Majmaʿ 
al-baḥrayn wa-maṭlaʿ al-nīrayn fī gharīb al-Qurʾān wa-l-ḥadīth36 and Gharīb 
aḥādīth al-khāṣṣa.37 Serdar Demirel mentions the book entitled Ghāyat 
al-āmāl by Maḥmūd ʿAlī b. Aṣghar al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī (d. 1310/1892) as a gharīb 
al-ḥadīth work,38 while al-Ṭihrānī simply refers to it as ‘sharḥ al-aḥādīth 
wa-tafsīr al-āyāt’.39 Muḥammad Riḍā b. Qāsim al-Najafī’s (d. 1303/1885) 
Lubb al-lubāb fī gharīb al-ḥadīth wa-l-kitāb is seemingly equally focused on 
hadith and Qur’an.40 To my knowledge, no recent gharīb al-ḥadīth work on 
Sunnī hadith has been published, while Shīʿī scholars continue to produce in 
this field today; for example, al-Bīrjandī’s Gharīb al-ḥadīth fī Bihār al-anwār 
was published in Tehran in 1421/2000–2001.41 
Gharīb al-ḥadīth in History: Centres of Production
The histories of various literary genres often present them as if all these works 
were produced, transmitted and used equally or to the same extent from  
al-Andalus, sub-Saharan Africa, to India and Southeast Asia. Even though 
it is self-evident that this was not the case (naturally some texts and genres  
were more popular and/or available in certain regions than in others), there 
35 According to al-Ṭihrānī, Dharīʿa, 20:22, al-Ṭurayḥī died in 1085/1674; al-Bīrjandī, 
Gharīb al-ḥadīth, has 1087/1676 or 77. 
36 Al-Ṭihrānī, Dharīʿa, 20:22. 
37 Al-Ṭihrānī, Dharīʿa, 16:46.
38 Demirel, ʿUlūm al-ḥadīth, 137.
39 Al-Ṭihrānī, Dharīʿa, 16:6.
40 Al-Ṭihrānī, Dharīʿa, 18:290; Demirel, ʿUlūm al-ḥadīth, 137.
41 While al-Bīrjandī’s alphabetically organised gharīb al-ḥadīth book on al-Majlisī’s Shīʿī 
hadith collection Bihār al-anwār is available online, the aforementioned books were not 
accessible to me and their inclusion here is based on al-Tihrānī’s Dharīʿa and Demirel’s 
study on ʿUlūm al-ḥadīth.
24 
STEFANIE BRINKMANN

  
BETWEEN PHILOLOGY AND HADITH CRITICISM 
25
is still a remarkable lack of geographical and social differentiation in the 
mapping of Arabic literature. Hence, I attempt to map the genre of gharīb 
al-ḥadīth and contextualise regional shifts in political and social events. 
For the formative period, that is, the first/seventh to the fourth/tenth 
century, the identification of regional centres of production also addresses 
the social-ethnic dimension of the impact of the mawālī in the production 
of gharīb al-ḥadīth books.42 By the late fourth/tenth and fifth/eleventh cen-
turies, we can speak of such an advanced state of Arabisation and Islamisa-
tion, and such a broad and established tradition of gharīb al-ḥadīth that 
questions of ethnicity and language seem to matter less, though the acqui-
sition and knowledge of Arabic remained a challenge for most non-Arab 
Muslims. Hence, while I raise the issue of ethnicity for the earliest authors 
of gharīb al-ḥadīth, the focus of this section is on their geographical prov-
enance and their main centres of activity. 
Mawlā status usually signifies a non-Arab convert to Islam who is ‘adopted’ 
by an Arab tribe, clan or patron. This system was important in the transition 
process from an Arab tribal society to the establishment of the Islamic civilisa-
tion, as it crystallised in the ʿAbbāsid period. The term mawlā is complex and 
lacks a clear-cut definition. Although it is applied mainly to non-Arab converts 
who become clients of an Arab patron, it was also applied to freedmen regard-
less of their ethnicity, especially in the first centuries; and while it is sometimes 
used as a synonym for a Persian, others use the term to refer to any non-Arab 
ethnic group.43 The fluid definition is met by the difficulties of attributing an 
ethnic descent to an author, given the multi-ethnic nature of many areas and 
widespread geographical mobility, and sometimes also because of the lack of 
information, or inconsistent information in the sources.
Still, the concept of being non-Arab seems to be a key factor in the mawlā 
designation. In the first centuries, non-Arabs had to learn Arabic if they 
wanted to serve in any official capacity and they had to decide whether to con-
vert; if they did convert, they needed it to gain status in this new political and 
religious order, for example, through military service or scholarship.44 Even 
second- or third-generation mawālī still recalled these enormous upheavals. 
42 ‘Ethnic’ and ‘ethnicity’ are problematic, ambiguous terms because they encompass  
concepts of shared ancestry, language, social practices, etc. These concepts must be 
studied as dynamic and socially constructed identities in specific historical contexts. 
In this subchapter, ethnicity takes the Arabic sources as a starting point and implies  
an Arab or non-Arab background.
43 John Nawas speaks about a socio-ethnic designation. Nawas, ‘The Birth of an Elite’, 
74–75 n.1. 
44 See also Lecker, ‘Biographical Notes’, 74, with reference to second-/eighth-century 
Basra. On the role of elites in the establishment of political, economic, and administra-
tive control over the vast regions of the early Islamic empire, see Hagemann and Heide-
mann (eds), Transregional and Regional Elites.

 Already in the nineteenth century, the role and importance of non-Arab 
scholars in the formation of Islamic civilisation (in terms of quantity as 
well as quality) were subjects of discussion. Influential Islamicists, includ-
ing Ignaz Goldziher, Josef Schacht and Alfred von Kremer, claimed that 
the development of Islamic civilisation was largely the achievement of non-
Arabs, most of Persian descent. In 1996, Rina Drory stressed the role of an 
urbanised second generation of Persian converts in the construction of an 
Arab past and as a link between the local tribal transmitters and the future 
scholars.45 Although this view has since been challenged, or at least modi-
fied, it is evident that non-Arab converts played an important role. Thus, 
the impression given in some publications, that ‘Arabs’ standardised the 
Arabic language, should be met with caution.46
In the field of Islamic law, Harald Motzki demonstrated the participa-
tion of Arab scholars in the first two centuries.47 A much broader statistical 
approach was taken by the ʿUlamāʾ-Project, carried out from 1994 to 2000 
by Monique Bernards and John Nawas. In order to determine the share of 
Arabs and mawālī in the fields of hadith, jurisprudence, exegesis, Qur’anic 
readings and grammar, they analysed ninety classical Arabic biographical 
dictionaries that covered the first four centuries. Throughout this period, 
the share is nearly equal (mawlā: 23.9 per cent, Arab: 23.3 per cent), with 
52.8 per cent unknown. When this is broken down by century, it shows the 
overwhelming preponderance of Arabs in the first/seventh century, com-
pared to the nearly equal share in the second/eighth century, and finally, 
a clear preponderance of mawālī in the third/ninth century. At the same 
time, the number of unknown designations rose continually over these four 
centuries, reflecting the above-mentioned fading of socio-ethnic differences 
during the development of a pan-Islamic civilisation. The dominance of 
Arabs in the first/seventh century is clearly explained by their role in trans-
mitting the prophetic traditions.48 
These results tie in with the findings of this chapter on gharīb al-ḥadīth 
production, as I illustrate below. The mawālī had a great influence on 
gharīb production during the period from the second/eighth to the third/
ninth century (and even beyond). Before turning to the biographies of the 
authors of gharīb al-ḥadīth, I offer a few insights into the authors’ percep-
tions of the development of language and non-Arab ethnicity.49 
Ibn Qutayba gives examples of the difficulty of some expressions, 
stresses the need to ask lexicographers for explanations and speaks of  
45 Drory, ‘Abbasid Construction’.
46 See, for example, Carter, ‘Arabic Lexicography’, 106–108.
47 Motzki, ‘The Role of Non-Arab Converts’.
48 Nawas, ‘The Birth of an Elite’.
49 As the vast majority of gharīb al-ḥadīth works have not been preserved and remain 
unedited or unstudied, I can only present a few voices from the authors of these works.
26 
STEFANIE BRINKMANN

  
BETWEEN PHILOLOGY AND HADITH CRITICISM 
27
students (ṭālibīn) using gharīb al-ḥadīth.50 We do not have a structured nar-
rative of how the Arabic language developed or how the growing contact and 
commingling between native Arabic speakers and non-Arabs took place. 
Al-Khaṭṭābī remarks that by the third/ninth century, there were a growing 
number of non-Arab (ʿajam) hadith transmitters, and this led to the spread 
of incorrect expressions or pronunciations.51 While al-Zamakhsharī does 
not dwell on incorrect expressions or pronunciations, apart from stress-
ing Muḥammad’s excellent Arabic,52 Ibn al-Jawzī offers a clear narrative. 
According to him, the Prophet, his Companions and their Successors were 
Arabs who communicated with one another in a common language. Over 
time, the increased interaction with non-Arabs led to a corruption of the 
Arabic language. Consequently, most people became ignorant of it and 
required explanation (tafsīr).53 In contrast to this simplistic narrative, Ibn 
al-Athīr refers to various levels of vocabulary – common (ʿāmm) and spe-
cialised or distinguished (khāṣṣ) – and the different tribal dialects in the 
Prophet’s time, although he, too, stresses the correctness of the language 
of the Companions (ṣaḥāba). During the conquests (futūḥ), however, the 
Arabs had intermingled with non-Arabs (Byzantines, Persians, Ethiopians, 
Nabateans and others), such that by the time of the Successors (tābiʿūn) 
foreign languages had begun to influence Arabic.54 
Turning to the biographies, for the first four centuries, the designation 
of mawlā was taken as key information; this was complemented by the 
category of the name. But note that many mawālī adopted Arab names 
and an Arab genealogy upon conversion, a point that creates difficulties in 
identifying lineages. 
Biographical analysis shows that many of the early authors were  
second- or third-generation mawālī: Muḥammad b. Aḥmad al-Mustanīr 
Quṭrub (d. 206/821) was probably a mawlā, though his exact ancestry 
is not known. Abū ʿUbayda Maʿmar b. al-Muthannā was a mawlā of 
the second generation, his grandfather was apparently a Persian Jew.55 
Abū al-ʿAbbās Aḥmad b. Yaḥyā Thaʿlab (d. 291/904), a scholar from and 
active in Baghdad, was a mawlā. In the West, ʿAbd al-Malik b. Ḥabīb was 
likely of mawlā origin.56 In some cases, authors may have had Nabatean  
forebears (e.g. the mother of Abū ʿAmr Isḥāq al-Shaybānī, d. between 
205/820 and 213/828), or Byzantine (e.g. the father of Abū ʿUbayd 
50 Ibn Qutayba, Gharīb al-ḥadīth, 147–152.
51 Al-Khaṭṭābī, Gharīb al-ḥadīth, 1:47.
52 Al-Zamakhsharī, al-Fāʾiq, 1:11.
53 Ibn al-Jawzī, Gharīb al-ḥadīth, 1:1. 
54 Ibn al-Athīr, al-Nihāya, 1:4–5.
55 Lecker, ‘Biographical Notes’; Madelung, ‘Abū ʿUbayda’.
56 Fierro, ‘Introduction of Ḥadīth in al-Andalus’, 75.

 al-Qāsim b. Sallām57), or Berber ancestors (e.g. Abū al-Qāsim Thābit and 
his son Abū Muḥammad Qāsim al-Saraqusṭī). Most non-Arab authors had 
Persian, often Khurāsānī family backgrounds like Ibn Qutayba, who was 
born in Kufa into an Arabicised Persian family from Khurāsān that prob-
ably went to Iraq in the early ʿAbbāsid period. Muḥammad b. Aḥmad b. 
Kaysān may have been of Persian descent, since the Iranian name Kaysān 
came from his grandfather. Many authors of the third/ninth and fourth/
tenth centuries were born and grew up, in part, in greater Khurāsān.58 
This is the case, for example, for Abū ʿUbayd al-Qāsim b. Sallām (from  
Herat), Ghulām Thaʿlab (d. c. 345/956–957, from Abīward, Khurāsān), 
al-Khaṭṭābī (from Bust, Khurāsān), and Abū ʿUbayd Aḥmad al-Harawī 
(from Herat). Other places of origin in Iran include Fasā, in the prov-
ince of Fārs; this was the birthplace of Abū Muḥammad ʿAbdallāh b. 
Durustawayh (d. 347/958).59 The prominence of those of often Persian 
provenance continued well into the sixth/twelfth century: Yaḥyā b. ʿAlī 
al-Tibrīzī (d. 502/1109)60 was born in Tabrīz; Ibn Fūrak al-Iṣbahānī (d. 
406/1015)61 was from Isfahan; ʿAbd al-Qāhir al-Suhrawardī (d. 563/1168) 
was born in Suhraward, in the province of Jibāl; ʿAbd al-Ghāfir al-Fārisī 
(d. 529/1134)62 hailed from Nishapur; and al-Zamakhsharī (d. 538/1144) 
was from Zamakhshar, in Khwārazm.
It should come as no surprise that scholars from greater Khurāsān 
played an important role, since it was a centre for many branches of early 
scholarship. The presence of Khurāsānī figures in early hadith scholarship 
in general is noteworthy, and gharīb al-ḥadīth can be seen as part of this 
early preoccupation with hadith among scholars from this region.
Bulliet assumes that 80 per cent of the population of Iran had become 
Muslim by the end of the fourth/tenth century.63 A rapid increase in conver-
sions could be observed following the ʿAbbāsid revolution in 132/750. There 
were many reasons for this phenomenon, among them the ambition to gain 
status in the newly established political rule, though economic issues, such 
as tax and inheritance laws, also played a role.64 A considerable number of 
Khurāsānīs came to Iraq during the early ʿAbbāsid caliphate.65 While this 
57 Ibn Khallikān, Wafayāt al-aʿyān, 4:60, no. 534: ‘wa-kāna abūhu ʿabdan rūmiyyan’.
58 On this region that stretches over parts of modern Iran, Turkmenistan, Afghanistan, 
and Tajikistan, see Rante, Greater Khorasan, 2015.
59 Sezgin, GAS, 8:106.
60 Kaḥḥāla, Muʿjam, 13:214; al-Ziriklī, al-Aʿlām, 8:157f.
61 Al-Ziriklī, al-Aʿlām, 6:83.
62 Kaḥḥāla, Muʿjam, 5:267.
63 Bulliet, ‘Conversion to Islam’, 31.
64 See Drory, ‘Abbasid Construction’; Paul, ‘Islam in Iran’.
65 Bulliet, ‘Conversion to Islam’; Paul, ‘Islam in Iran’; Daniel, ‘Conversion II’; Khan, ‘An 
Empire of Elites’.
28 
STEFANIE BRINKMANN

  
BETWEEN PHILOLOGY AND HADITH CRITICISM 
29
may explain, in part, the social mobility between Iraq and Khurāsān, it does 
not necessarily explain the huge impact of scholars from those areas. Given 
that greater Khurāsān was a centre of learning, with a great number of schol-
ars and madrasas even before the Niẓāmiyya was established in Baghdad,66 
it is easy to see that this prosperous scholarship formed the ideal conditions 
for the development of Islamic thought. The central role its location played 
in trade with the East resulted in somewhat wealthy cities, and only added 
to this situation. Hence, Khurāsānī scholars travelled or moved to Baghdad, 
and Arab scholars relocated to Khurāsān. The Arab Naḍr b. Shumayl (d. c. 
204/820), an early gharīb al-ḥadīth author, is a typical figure who illustrates 
the mobility between Khurāsān and Iraq. He was born in Marw, grew up in 
Basra, studied lexicography (under Khalīl b. Aḥmad), grammar, hadith and 
fiqh in Iraq, and later returned to his hometown of Marw, where he acted as 
judge (qāḍī) and joined the majālis of al-Maʾmūn.67
Let us now turn to the production centres of gharīb al-ḥadīth. Regardless 
of their descent and birthplace, nearly all gharīb al-ḥadīth authors, at some 
point in their careers, studied in Iraq with famous scholars in the fields of 
grammar and lexicography, as well as hadith and fiqh.68 As expected, Kufa 
and Basra initially had pride of place, since they were the centres of grammar 
(and the respective grammar schools) and lexicography. By the third/ninth 
century, Baghdad had gained importance in these fields. As the seat of the 
ʿAbbāsid caliphate it witnessed enormous growth and became a centre 
of scholarship; it was simply ‘the place to go’.69 This shift in importance 
from Kufa and Basra to Baghdad is evident from the activities of the gharīb 
al-ḥadīth authors. Early second-/eighth- to third-/ninth-century authors 
were closely connected with Kufa or Basra,70 and were often affiliated with 
the school of grammar they adhered to. But from the fourth/tenth century 
on, many were centred in Baghdad.71 
Even in the fifth/eleventh and sixth/twelfth centuries, with Baghdad  
under Būyid and Saljūq rule, scholars still travelled to Baghdad. In 447/ 
1055, the Turkish Saljūqs invaded the city, brought an end to the Shīʿī Būyid 
dynasty (334–447/945–1055) and promoted a ‘Sunnisation’ of the city.  
66 Mottahedeh, ‘The Transmission of Learning’.
67 Al-Zubaydī, Ṭabaqāt, 55–61. 
68 One of the exceptions was ʿAbd al-Ghāfir al-Fārisī (d. 529/1134), who remained in 
the East and travelled to Khwārazm, Ghazna and India (Hind) before returning to his 
hometown, Nishapur, where he died. 
69 Scheiner and Janos (eds), The Place to Go, 1–45.
70 For example, Naḍr b. Shumayl, al-Asmaʿī, Muḥammad b. Aḥmad al-Mustanīr Quṭrub, 
al-Shaybānī, Abū ʿUbayd al-Qāsim b. Sallām, Abū ʿUbayd b. al-Muthannā and al-
Mubarrad.
71 Among these, we can list Ibn Thaʿlab, al-Anbārī, Ibn Kaysān, Abū al-Ḥusayn ʿUmar b. 
Dirham, Ghulām Thaʿlab, al-Khaṭṭābī, al-Dāraquṭnī and Ibn Durustawayh.

 Part of this endeavour involved the establishment (by the vizier Niẓām  
al-Mulk) of the Niẓāmiyya madrasa, which became a centre of Sunnī scholar-
ship. Thus, Baghdad remained the place to go under Saljūq rule and many 
gharīb al-ḥadīth authors studied and taught there. The author Yaḥyā b. 
ʿAlī al-Tibrīzī (d. 502/1109) grew up in Baghdad, travelled to Syria, stayed 
in Damascus for a while and visited Cairo, before returning to Baghdad to 
work at the Niẓāmiyya madrasa. Roughly a generation later, ʿAbd al-Qāhir 
al-Suhrawardī (d. 563/1168) taught hadith at the Niẓāmiyya. Among his 
many travels, al-Zamakhsharī (d. 538/1144) stayed in Baghdad before return-
ing to his home, Khwārazm, where he died. The Ḥanbalī Arab Ibn al-Jawzī  
(d. 597/1200) was native to Baghdad and a highly influential scholar of the city. 
When Saljūq rule disintegrated, it reformed into individual atabeg domains, 
such as the Zangid dynasty that ruled in parts of Syria and northern Iraq 
(521–649/1127–1250). The peak of gharīb al-ḥadīth activity, namely Ibn al- 
Athīr’s al-Nihāya fī gharīb al-ḥadīth, happened in Mosul under Zangid rule. 
Baghdad remained a centre of scholarship into the seventh/thirteenth 
century, under Sunnī ʿAbbāsid and Ayyūbid power. Political constella-
tions allowed for travel between Iraq, Egypt, Syria and even Turkey, then 
under the dynasty of the Rum Saljūqs. Muwaffaq al-Dīn ʿAbd al-Laṭīf al- 
Baghdādī’s biography is rather typical; he wrote the gharīb al-ḥadīth book 
al-Mujarrad li-lughat [or gharīb] al-ḥadīth. ʿAbd al-Laṭīf al-Baghdādī, who 
was born and died in Baghdad, travelled to Egypt, Syria, Jerusalem (then 
under Ayyūbid rule) and the territories of the Rum Saljūqs. With the end of 
the ʿAbbāsid caliphate in 656/1258, political constellations in the Near and 
Middle East changed and new centres of scholarship arose.
Beside greater Khurāsān and Iraq, the West, or more precisely al- 
Andalus, was another site of early gharīb al-ḥadīth scholarship. The emirate  
of Cordoba (138–317/756–929) and the succeeding caliphate of Cordoba 
(317–422/929–1031) ushered in a period of cultural blossoming. Hadith 
studies were introduced to al-Andalus from the second half of the second/ 
eighth century, through works such as Mālik b. Anas’s (d. 179/795) Muwaṭṭaʾ. 
One of the central figures in the introduction of hadith to al-Andalus was 
ʿAbd al-Malik b. Ḥabīb al-Qurṭubī (d. 238/852), who was born in Ḥiṣn Wāṭ, 
close to Granada, and flourished in Cordoba, where he also died. By the first 
half of the third/ninth century, Mālikī law was established as the predom-
inant madhhab in al-Andalus, and in this context ʿAbd al-Malik b. Ḥabīb 
wrote a gharīb al-ḥadīth book on Mālik’s Muwaṭṭaʾ. Like other early hadith 
scholars, he travelled to the East, namely to Mecca, Medina and Egypt, in 
order to study with local scholars and collect books from the East (mashriq) 
to bring back to his native land.72 There was a clear dominance of Egyptian  
72 See the preface to ʿAbd al-Malik, Tafsīr gharīb al-Muwaṭṭaʾ, 1:23. Fierro, ‘Introduction 
of Ḥadīth’, 77–78. See also Akmaluddin, ‘Epistemology of Sharḥ Ḥadīth’.
30 
STEFANIE BRINKMANN

  
BETWEEN PHILOLOGY AND HADITH CRITICISM 
31
and Medinese traditionists in al-Andalus at this earliest stage – it was only 
in the second half of the third/ninth century that Andalusī (hadith) scholars 
began to train in Iraq, too.73 Egypt and Arabia remained important desti-
nations for Andalusī scholars, however. Abū al-Qāsim Thābit and his son 
Muḥammad Qāsim b. Thābit al-Saraqusṭī followed the Ḥijāzī and Egyptian 
route for their riḥla. In around 288/900 they travelled from Saragossa to the 
east and studied in Egypt and Mecca with known scholars. They returned to 
al-Andalus in 294/906 as experts in language (lugha) and hadith, and jointly 
produced the well-known gharīb al-ḥadīth book entitled al-Dalāʾil fī sharḥ 
mā aghfala Abū ʿUbayd wa-Ibn Qutayba min gharīb al-ḥadīth. The book 
merges, critically revises and complements the works of Abū ʿUbayd and  
Ibn Qutayba. 
Under Almoravid (al-Murābiṭ) rule (mid-fifth/eleventh century to 
541/1147), Qāḍī ʿIyāḍ (d. 544/1149, fl. Ceuta, Granada, Marrakesh) pro-
duced his Mashāriq al-anwār ʿalā ṣaḥīḥ al-āthār (fī tafsīr gharīb al-ḥadīth), 
a work that reflects the aforementioned fluid boundary between gharīb and 
commentary. The influential Maṭāliʿ al-anwār ʿalā ṣiḥāḥ al-āthār (fī fatḥ 
mā staghlaqa min kitāb al-Muwaṭṭaʾ wa-kitāb Muslim wa-kitāb al-Bukhārī) 
by Ibn Qurqūl (Ibrāhīm b. Yūsuf, d. 569/1173) was likewise produced 
under the Almoravid (al-Murābiṭ) and Almohad (al-Muwaḥḥid) dynas-
ties, which stretched from parts of the Maghrib to al-Andalus. Nūr al-Dīn 
b. al-Khaṭīb al-Dahsha al-Ḥamawī’s (d. 834/1431) Tahdhīb al-maṭāliʿ 
and Tuḥfat dhawī al-arab fī mushkil al-asmāʾ wa-l-nasab, and al-Ḥusāmī 
al-Qirīmī’s Muntakhab maṭāliʿ al-anwār (written in 757/1356) all include 
excerpts from Ibn Qurqūl’s Maṭāliʿ; al-Suyūṭī is supposed to have used it 
for his Tuḥfat dhawī al-adab.74 The Maṭāliʿ was apparently versified by 
Muḥammad b. Muḥammad al-Baʿlī al-Mawṣilī (d. 774/1372).75 The recep-
tion of Ibn Qurqūl’s Maṭāliʿ thus continued far into eighth-/fourteenth- 
and ninth-/fifteenth-century Egypt and Syria. Apart from al-Andalus and 
parts of Morocco, however, gharīb al-ḥadīth books are largely absent from 
the Maghrib. 
To sum up, regarding the centres of gharīb al-ḥadīth production up 
until the seventh/thirteenth century, we know that the biographies of 
gharīb al-ḥadīth authors mention travels to Egypt, Mecca, Medina, Mosul, 
and Syria (Aleppo and Damascus), although these cities and regions do 
not appear to have been important production centres for gharīb al-ḥadīth 
works until the seventh/thirteenth century. While Motzki identifies several 
centres of Islamic law in the first two centuries (Mecca and Medina, Kufa 
and Basra, Yemen, Syria, Egypt, and Khurāsān), it seems that there were  
73 Fierro, ‘Introduction of Ḥadīth’, 77–78.
74 Brockelmann, GAL, 1:370–371, 2:66, Suppl. 1:633, 2:70–71.
75 Kaḥḥāla, Muʿjam, 11:235–236; al-Ziriklī, al-Aʿlām, 7:39–40.

 far fewer places of production for the gharīb al-ḥadīth works. Iraq was defi-
nitely the centre of gharīb al-ḥadīth activity from the Umayyad period until 
the seventh/thirteenth century; work then began in Basra and Kufa, and 
then continued in Baghdad from the third/ninth century. Other regions 
of gharīb al-ḥadīth activity include greater Khurāsān in the east and al-
Andalus (including Morocco, in the case of Qāḍī ʿIyāḍ and Ibn Qurqūl) in 
the west. 
This pattern of gharīb al-ḥadīth production and its scholarly network 
changed during the seventh/thirteenth and eighth/fourteenth centuries. 
Apart from ʿAbd al-Laṭīf al-Baghdādī’s al-Mujarrad, we do not know of any 
major work of gharīb al-ḥadīth that was composed in the seventh/thirteenth 
century.76 There were many reasons for this. The most obvious is that Ibn 
al-Athīr’s al-Nihāya had collected everything that needed to be said about 
obscure and foreign words in hadith, and so there was no need to add any-
thing further. In addition, Iraq and the regions to the east suffered from 
political turmoil. The Mongol invasion of Baghdad in 656/1258 ended the 
ʿAbbāsid caliphate, destroying important economic infrastructures. Bagh-
dad lost a large proportion of its population during this invasion. It ceased 
to be a central political power under Mongol rule, which was characterised 
by multiple urban centres such as Tabriz, Sultaniyya and Maragha. Even 
though Mongol and post-Mongol rule stimulated its own distinct cultural 
and scientific activities, it seems that religious scholarship on the Qur’an 
and hadith found less patronage than before the conquest – at least until 
Ghazan Khān’s conversion to Islam in 694/1295. Sunnī scholarship found 
support further to the west, in the Mamlūk Empire. The centres of gharīb 
al-ḥadīth production thus shifted to Egypt and partly to Syria. While until 
then many authors had hailed from the east (Iran and Central Asia) and 
the west (mainly al-Andalus), from the eighth/fourteenth century on most 
authors were from Syria or Egypt.77 
The beginnings of Mamlūk rule were characterised by power struggles; 
they were not firmly established in Egypt until the rule of Sultan Baybars 
(r. 658–676/1260–1277). Syria remained a contested region throughout the 
seventh/thirteenth century; finally, Egypt and Syria were united under the 
Mamlūks in the eighth/fourteenth century. At this point, some limited gharīb 
al-ḥadīth activity resumed, in the figures of Muḥammad b. Muḥammad 
76 Aḥmad b. ʿAbdallāh al-Ṭabarī (d. 694/1295), born and active in Mecca, with ties to 
Rasūlid Yemen, wrote two alphabetical rearrangements of Abū ʿUbayd al-Qāsim’s 
Gharīb al-ḥadīth: al-Durr al-manthūr li-l-Malik al-Manṣūr and Taqrīb al-marām  
fī gharīb al-Qāsim b. Sallām (see ‘al-Ṭabarī’, in EI2, 10:16). 
77 Examples include Muḥammad b. Muḥammad al-Mawṣilī al-Baʿlī (d. 774/1372), 
Ismāʿīl b. Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad b. Birdis al-Baʿlbakī (d. 786/1384), Maḥmūd b. 
Muḥammad al-Dahsha al-Ḥamawī (834/1430), Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī (d. 852/1449) 
and Qāsim b. Quṭlūbughā (d. 879/1474).
32 
STEFANIE BRINKMANN

  
BETWEEN PHILOLOGY AND HADITH CRITICISM 
33
al-Mawṣilī al-Baʿlī,78 who was born in Baalbek, active in Damascus and 
Hama, and died in Tripoli in 774/1372, and Ismāʿīl b. Muḥammad b. Bardis  
al-Baʿlbakī (d. 786/1384), from Baalbek.79 These two authors wrote versi-
fications of earlier gharīb al-ḥadīth books: al-Mawṣilī al-Baʿlī’s Lawāmiʿ 
al-anwār fī naẓm gharīb al-Muwaṭṭaʾ wa-Muslim seems to be a versification 
of Ibn Qurqūl’s Maṭāliʿ al-anwār, while Ibn Bardis al-Baʿlbakī’s [al-Kifāya 
fī] naẓm al-Nihāya is a versification of Ibn al-Athīr’s al-Nihāya. The ninth/
fifteenth century saw an expansion of the Mamlūk Empire via the Hijaz to 
Yemen, but internal strife and war expenditures weakened Mamlūk power 
during this time. In the eighth/fourteenth and ninth/fifteenth centuries, vast 
regions of the Middle East (and beyond) were also ravaged by the plague, 
which led to a substantial decrease in population and severe economic cri-
ses. Further to the north, in Turkey, the first Ottoman sultans established 
and expanded their power in the eighth/fourteenth century, as rivals (and 
sometimes allies) of the Mamlūks, before defeating them in the early tenth/
sixteenth century by invading Syria (in 922/1516) and conquering Egypt  
(in 923/1517). 
One would think that such periods of political instability and socio-
economic crisis were not necessarily favourable to intellectual productivity. 
But even in times of crisis, we can sometimes observe an impressive output 
of cultural production, a paradox that Carl Petry pointed out with regard 
to patronage during the later Mamlūk period.80 Apart from the fact that 
some people actually profited from the crisis, the cultural heyday of late 
Mamlūk Egypt is to a large extent due to the complex nature of Mamlūk 
society, which comprised roughly three groups: the Turkish Mamlūk elite, 
civil officials (often ʿulamāʾ) and the mainly Arabophone population. The 
complex relationship between the Mamlūk elite and civil officials was one 
of interdependence: members of the military elite offered patronage, often 
through salaried positions (manṣib, pl. manāṣib), while civil officials acted 
as mediators between the partly detached Turkish elite and the population.81 
Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī, to whom some sources attribute a gharīb al-ḥadīth 
book, is an example of this Mamlūk-ʿulamāʾ bond.82 Born in 773/1372 in 
Egypt, he held a number of positions, including the chief Shāfiʿī judge 
(qāḍī) in Egypt in 827/1424. Furthermore, amidst the weakening of 
political and economic power, many amīrs and sultans, as well as their 
78 Kaḥḥāla, Muʿjam, 11:235–236 (he does not mention a specific title, only that al-Baʿlī 
al-Mawṣilī wrote a versification of the Maṭāliʿ al-anwār); al-Ziriklī, al-Aʿlām, 7:39–40; 
GAL has him as al-Baladī, GAL 2:25, 161; Suppl. 2:20–21.
79 Kaḥḥāla, Muʿjam, 2:290 (has the title as al-Kifāya fī ikhtiṣār al-Nihāya); al-Ziriklī, 
al-Aʿlām 1:324; GAL 1:358 (has a date of death 764/1362).
80 Petry, ‘A Paradox of Patronage’. 
81 Petry, ‘A Paradox of Patronage’, 184–185.
82 See n. 8. 

 wives and children, established pious endowments (waqf) in the form of 
madrasas, mosques, khānqāhs and other places of scholarship, and public 
welfare. Hence, the relationship between elites and civil officials, as well 
as the practice of waqf, enabled scholars to gain influential positions and 
made Cairo (and also Mamlūk Syria) into a centre of scholarship.83 Besides 
Ibn Ḥajar (a Shāfīʿī), his contemporary Ḥanafī colleague Ibn Quṭlūbughā 
(d. 879/1474) also turned his attention to gharīb al-ḥadīth, but in Ibn 
Quṭlūbughā’s case in the context of the Ḥanafī legal tradition: his Gharīb 
al-aḥādīth al-madhkūra fī sharḥ mukhtaṣar al-Qudūrī li-l-Aqṭaʿ seems to 
be a gharīb work based on al-Aqṭaʿ’s commentary on the widely dissemi-
nated Mukhtaṣar fī al-fiqh al-Ḥanafī by Aḥmad b. Muḥammad al-Qudūrī 
(d. 428/1037).84 And al-Suyūṭī (d. 911/1505) composed al-Durr al-nathīr fī 
talkhīṣ Nihāya Ibn al-Athīr, one of the many abridgements of Ibn al-Athīr’s 
al-Nihāya.
In 922/1516, the Ottoman sultan Selim invaded Syria and then Egypt in 
923/1517. Ottoman power expanded to the Hijaz and into parts of Yemen, 
where they secured control over the holy sites and harbours important for 
the Indian Ocean trade. By way of these established trade and pilgrimage 
routes, three scholars to whom gharīb al-ḥadīth works have been attrib-
uted arrived from the Indian Sultanate of Gujarat: ʿĪsā b. Muḥammad Quṭb 
al-Dīn al-Safawī (d. 953/1546), ʿAlī al-Muttaqī al-Hindī (d. 975/1567)85 
and a certain ʿAlī al-Hindī (lived around 952/1545).86 All three are said to 
have composed abridgements of Ibn al-Athīr’s al-Nihāya, all with the same 
simple title Mukhtaṣar al-Nihāya. In Mecca, ʿAlī al-Muttaqī was the Sufi 
master of another scholar who hailed from Gujarat, Muḥammad Ṭāhir ʿAlī 
al-Patanī (d. 986/1578). In al-Patanī’s Majmaʿ biḥār al-anwār fī gharāʾib 
al-tanzīl wa laṭāʾif al-akhbār he examined uncommon words in the Ṣaḥīḥs 
of al-Bukhārī and Muslim.87 But in general, production of Sunnī gharīb 
al-ḥadīth had slowed down decisively by the tenth/sixteenth century. 
This contrasts with an increase in Twelver Shīʿī commentary production 
under Ṣafavid rule, with its patronage of Shīʿī scholarship and Shīʿī gharīb 
83 Since scholars often depended on the patronage of the ruling elite, there was competition 
to receive support. See Blecher, Said the Prophet of God, 49–79; Broadbridge, ‘Academic 
Rivalries’. 
84 Al-Ziriklī, al-Aʿlām, 1:213. Al-Qudūrī’s Mukhtaṣar was a standard work in Ḥanafī  
law, and al-Aqṭaʿ’s commentary on it, the Sharḥ Mukhtaṣar al-Qudūrī, was widely used 
in teaching and learning contexts. On different titles, see Sezgin, GAS, 1:452; in his 
edition of Ibn Quṭlūbughā’s Gharīb al-Qurʾān, the editor ʿAlī al-Ḥafīsha (1971) names 
a certain Sharḥ gharīb aḥādīth sharḥ al-Aqṭaʿ ʿalā al-Qudūrī (54); al-Kattānī, Fihris 
al-fahāris, 2:973. 
85 Hosein, ‘al-Muttaḳī al-Hindī’, in EI2, 7:800–801. 
86 Kaḥḥāla, Muʿjam, 7:258.
87 On him see Chapter 8 in this volume.
34 
STEFANIE BRINKMANN

  
BETWEEN PHILOLOGY AND HADITH CRITICISM 
35
al-ḥadīth publications, both of which continued under the ensuing dynas-
ties and into the twentieth century.88 
The Structure of the Gharīb Al-ḥadīth Works
Since most of the early gharīb al-ḥadīth works have not been preserved, it 
is difficult to assess to what extent they all adhered to the same structure. 
It is clear from what has been preserved, however, that the arrangement 
of gharīb al-ḥadīth works until the fourth/tenth century (and possibly 
beyond) was based on the isnād. Hence, it followed principles of had-
ith sciences and the ṭabaqāt system. Abū ʿUbayd al-Qāsim b. Sallām, Ibn 
Qutayba, al-Saraqusṭī and al-Khaṭṭābī structured their material according 
to the transmitters and isnād system, while al-Ḥarbī’s Gharīb al-ḥadīth 
displays an isnād arrangement in combination with formal criteria. Later 
authors, for example, al-Zamakhsharī and Ibn al-Athīr, rearranged the 
material and used a system based on formal criteria, that is, some type of 
alphabetical arrangement. In this chapter, I examine the different types 
of arrangements, exemplifying structure and content with an excursis on 
words for (alcoholic) beverages and their containers in selected gharīb 
al-ḥadīth works. 
The alphabetical system may have been advantageous in a time of better 
public education and increased participation of scholars and laymen from 
various scientific fields and with diverse interests in the study of hadith 
texts.89 Since gharīb books were widely used in teaching, it was easier for 
students to navigate through a formally arranged dictionary when search-
ing for a word rather than to sort through isnāds. Another basic difference 
between the various gharīb al-ḥadīth works is the use of linguistic evidence 
to help explain words; this linguistic evidence came from poetry, Bedouin 
sayings and expressions, and the Qur’an. While Abū ʿUbayd al-Qāsim b. 
Sallām quotes poetry to a limited extent, later authors sometimes quote 
linguistic and literary evidence (shawāhid) more extensively and digress in 
part from lexical explanations to a more elaborate treatment of the linguis-
tic data, for example by discussing derivation (ishtiqāq) or citing proverbs 
and anecdotes. 
The gharīb material in books following the isnād structure can be 
divided into three groups of traditions: those attributed to the Prophet, 
those from his Companions and those from the Successors. Apart from 
this division, there seems no further clear arrangement of the material, 
88 The biographies and historical contexts of Shīʿī authors must be the object of another 
study. See also Chapter 6.
89 The more user-friendly alphabetical arrangement was also stressed by Ibn al-Athīr, 
al-Nihāya, 1:8.

 but this does not exclude logical thematic complexes in minor clusters 
entirely. Ramzi Baalbaki argues that, apart from Abū ʿUbayd’s isnād-based 
structure, ‘[t]here is no further internal arrangement within this general 
division’.90 Overall, Baalbaki’s claim seems valid. But this does not mean 
that the text is completely devoid of any internal structure, as the discus-
sion of alcoholic beverages shows.
Abū ʿUbayd uses the occasion of a single prophetic hadith to cover the 
whole topic of alcoholic beverages; in a passage over roughly seven pages, 
he even includes a discussion of the vessels connected to these beverages.91 
Instead of treating the various appellations scattered over various traditions 
separately, Abū ʿUbayd collects them in one place. In doing so, he also dis-
regards the division between prophetic, Companion and Successor hadiths. 
In fact, most traditions relating to (alcoholic) beverages are attributed to 
Companions or Successors and not to the Prophet. Here content dominates 
the otherwise higher order of the isnād arrangement. 
Abū ʿUbayd treats the topic in three sections: beverages with specific 
names, beverages without specific appellations and the vessels that contain 
potentially alcoholic beverages. He structures the material as follows: the 
starting point is a prophetic hadith, introduced as: ‘And Abū ʿUbayd said: 
In the hadith of the Prophet, may he be blessed, he was asked about the bitʿ 
[a honey wine], and he answered: “Any beverage that intoxicates is forbid-
den.”’92 Although at first glance the question seems to relate to one specific 
beverage, the Prophet’s general statement that any intoxicating beverage 
is forbidden frames the following explanation of appellations. Abū ʿUbayd 
then discusses khamr, sakar, bitʿ, jiʿa, mizr, sukurka, faḍīkh, muṣannaf, ṭilāʾ, 
bādhaq, bukhtuj, jumhūrī, naqīʿ (al-zabīb), maqdhī, muzzāʾ and ṣaʿf.
The section opens as follows: 
With regard to the beverages (al-ashriba), there are numerous tradi-
tions (āthār) from the Prophet (may God be pleased with him) and 
his Companions with different beverage appellations, and for each 
[there is] an explanation (tafsīr). And the first of them is khamr; this 
is what is fermented from grape juice (wa-hiya mā ghaliya min ʿaṣīr 
al-ʿinab).93
Abū ʿUbayd stresses that there is no disagreement among Muslims 
about the prohibition of khamr, but there is disagreement about other 
beverages. This applies, for example, to sakar, made from dates that are 
90 Baalbaki, Arabic Lexicographical Tradition, 74.
91 Abū ʿUbayd, Gharīb al-ḥadīth, ed. Khān, 2:175–183. 
92 Abū ʿUbayd, Gharīb al-ḥadīth, ed. Khān, 2:175.
93 Abū ʿUbayd, Gharīb al-ḥadīth, ed. Khān, 2:176.
36 
STEFANIE BRINKMANN

  
BETWEEN PHILOLOGY AND HADITH CRITICISM 
37
not boiled (lam tamassahu al-nār). Abū ʿUbayd then quotes ʿAbdallāh b. 
Masʿūd as stating that sakar is khamr – and this equivalency makes it a 
forbidden drink. 
The remainder of this section adheres to the same structure: Abū ʿUbayd 
cites the individual terms and then gives a brief explanation. For example: 
And among these is al-bitʿ (wa-minhā al-bitʿ), this is the one that was 
mentioned in the Prophet’s (may God be pleased with him) had-
ith, and it is a wine made from honey (nabīdh al-ʿasal). And among 
these [drinks] is al-jiʿa, and this is a wine made from barley (nabīdh 
al-shaʿīr). And among these in al-mizr, and it is made from sorghum 
(wa-huwa min al-dhura).94
This section on specific appellations concludes with the remark that 
all these names should be subsumed under the term khamr and that the 
author compiled them in one place because of a prophetic hadith: ‘Some 
people of my umma drink wine (khamr), whatever they might call it’ (inna 
nāsan min ummatī yashribūna al-khamr bi-ismi yusammūnahā bihi).95 
The next short thematic section deals with beverages for which 
Abū ʿUbayd does not have specific designations, such as a naqīʿ (made  
from raisins), a wine (nabīdh) made from wheat (ḥinṭa) or figs (tīn), or  
a condensed dibs, from the juice of dates. In sum, Abū ʿUbayd refers  
to the well-known hadith by ʿUmar b. al-Khaṭṭāb stating that khamr 
is anything that cloaks or changes the rational mind (al-khamr mā 
khāmara al-ʿaql). 
This pattern of a general introduction, followed by a hadith that out-
lines the topic, and a conclusion can also be found in the next section, 
the last one related to beverages, about vessels. In hadith collections the 
chapters on beverages (bāb/abwāb al-ashriba) contain traditions related 
to specific vessels that the Prophet had supposedly forbidden. Accordingly, 
Abū ʿUbayd adds these vessels to his section on (alcoholic) beverages. He 
starts again with a reference to a prophetic hadith in which Muḥammad 
prohibited the use of dubbāʾ, ḥantam, naqīr and muzaffat. Abū ʿUbayd 
then explains these terms, for example, by giving other (non-prophetic) 
traditions. The dubbāʾ (gourd) is mentioned with reference to people in 
Taif, who use gourds as vessels for grapes; they left grapes in them to fer-
ment (lit. until they boil, or bubble, hadara). The naqīr is a kind of vessel 
94 On ingredients and appellations, see also Brinkmann, ‘Beer in Early Islam’; Brinkmann, 
‘Wine in Ḥadīth’; Kueny, Rhetoric of Sobriety. For the pre- and early Islamic period, see 
Maraqten, ‘Wine Drinking’. For the Mamlūk period, see Lewicka, Food and Foodways, 
457–550.
95 Abū ʿUbayd, Gharīb al-ḥadīth, ed. Khān, 2:180.

 made by people in Yemen, who hollowed out the stump of a date tree, and 
placed various types of dates in it until they started to boil (that is, fer-
ment). The ḥantam is explained as a green ceramic vessel that was used 
to transport wine (khamr), and the muzaffat is a vessel that was treated 
with pitch. Following these explanations, Abū ʿUbayd again sums up their 
relevance: these vessels were forbidden by the Prophet if they contained 
alcoholic beverages or types of juice, fruit or grain that could undergo  
fermentation in them, but there is no harm in using these vessels if there is 
nothing fermenting or alcoholic in them. Part of this conclusion is a tradi-
tion from Ibn ʿAbbās: ‘Anything ḥalāl remains ḥalāl [regardless of what] 
kind of vessel [it is in], and anything ḥarām remains ḥarām [regardless of 
what] kind of vessel [it is in].’96 
The section on beverages and vessels is followed by a section on bless-
ings after someone sneezes and then by a section on fasting in winter, both 
introduced by prophetic hadiths. Thus, major topics might not always 
show a logical arrangement, but it is noteworthy that within these sec-
tions a systematic structure does appear, as is clearly shown by the chap-
ter on beverages and vessels. In explaining various words, Abū ʿUbayd 
quotes other traditions and occasionally cites poetic evidence (shawāhid). 
Interestingly, Qur’anic verses are not cited, even though the prohibition 
of intoxicating beverages is addressed in a number of (in part seemingly 
diverging) Qur’anic verses. Abū ʿUbayd also notes when he is not familiar 
with a particular term but has been informed about its existence. 
This earliest preserved gharīb al-ḥadīth book clearly shows why we can 
see this genre as a starting point for more extensive commentaries: not only 
does it transgress pure word-by-word explanations and include the histori-
cal and geographic contexts for some beverage appellations, but Abū ʿUbayd 
also frames these appellations in a larger interpretative effort. His way of 
introducing and concluding thematic sections is a commentary on the legal 
question of alcoholic beverages (and the vessels that contain them). Hence, 
he goes beyond a lexicographical explanation, beyond a definition of vocab-
ulary, and discusses the (legal) relevance of related traditions. This is not 
necessarily true for all topics treated in his Gharīb; rather it depends largely 
on the legal or theological implications of single traditions. But Abū ʿUbayd 
clearly shows that his ambition was to comment on hadith more broadly, 
not exclusively on lexicographical grounds. 
Al-Ḥarbī (d. 285/898) was perhaps the first to combine the isnād 
arrangement and formal criteria. Only the fifth and last volume of his 
Gharīb al-ḥadīth has survived. This fragment of the fifth volume of his 
work spans three volumes in the modern edition; we can speculate that the 
complete work was an extensive gharīb al-ḥadīth compilation. Al-Ḥarbī 
96 Abū ʿUbayd, Gharīb al-ḥadīth, ed. Khān, 2:182–183.
38 
STEFANIE BRINKMANN

  
BETWEEN PHILOLOGY AND HADITH CRITICISM 
39
complemented the specific lemma of one hadith with other possible per-
mutations of that root found in other hadith. For instance, the subchapter 
on the lemma m-s-k is supplemented by the lemmata m-k-s and s-m-k. 
Sh-ʿ-r is supplemented by r-ʿ-sh, ʿ-r-sh, sh-r-ʿ, ʿ-sh-r. While the roots do 
not follow a specific order, al-Ḥarbī usually quotes the hadith alongside 
the isnād, and he occasionally digresses into other semantic fields. The 
difficulty in navigating his book, in terms of looking up a specific word, 
was mentioned by Ibn al-Athīr97 and subsequent authors did not adopt 
al-Ḥarbī’s system. 
As mentioned earlier, there is a strong interrelation between the 
gharīb al-ḥadīth books. Abū ʿUbayd and Ibn Qutayba’s works consti-
tute the foundation of this genre; all subsequent works were built on 
them. Abū ʿUbayd’s book may be considered the starting point. In his 
Gharīb al-ḥadīth Ibn Qutayba usually does not repeat Abū ʿUbayd but 
adds details where he thinks information is missing. In his critical reas-
sessment of Abū ʿUbayd’s material, his treatment of the linguistic data 
is also more elaborate. Ibn Qutayba’s work follows the tripartite system 
of traditions from the Prophet, Companions and Successors,98 and is 
preceded by six introductory chapters.99 In these chapters, he discusses 
words related to jurisprudence (fiqh) and judicial decisions (aḥkām), 
namely purification, prayer, almsgiving and taxes, selling and buying, 
marriage and divorce. This is followed by a collection of words relat-
ing to various fields of jurisprudence. These chapters are a separate 
book, like a small compendium for legal experts. Ibn Qutayba’s critical 
revision of Abū ʿUbayd’s material is also evident in his second book, 
Iṣlāḥ ghalaṭ Abū ʿUbayd fī Gharīb al-ḥadīth, in which Ibn Qutayba criti-
cises fifty-three traditions from Abū ʿUbayd. His Masāʾil wa-l-ajwiba 
fī ḥadīth wa-l-tafsīr follows another arrangement, namely 190 discus-
sions (masʾala) related to hadith, with a special focus on gharīb words.100 
As noted, Ibn Qutayba’s fourth book, Taʾwīl mukhtalif al-ḥadīth, is a 
border case.
Regarding beverages, Ibn Qutayba does not repeat those mentioned by 
Abū ʿUbayd, but he adds further evidence, for example, additional tradi-
tions or Qur’anic verses. In this practice, he is followed by most later schol-
ars. In addition to his Gharīb al-ḥadīth, Ibn Qutayba published a separate 
work on the issue of beverages: Kitāb al-Ashriba wa-dhikr ikhtilāf al-nās  
 97 Ibn al-Athīr, al-Nihāya, 1:8.
 98 Female transmitters have a separate section under the Companions (ṣaḥāba).
 99 Ibn Qutayba, Gharīb al-ḥadīth, 153–240. Baalbaki mentions only five, without further 
information. 
100 This work was written after his Gharīb al-ḥadīth, as is evident from a reference of 
the assumed interlocutor, who refers to traditions that would not be included in the 
Gharīb al-ḥadīth (masʾala 21). 

 fīhā.101 As the title (The book of beverages and the people’s differing views on 
them) suggests, the book discusses beverages, including their legal impact. 
It includes poetic evidence, anecdotes and proverbs, and presents and dis-
cusses diverging attitudes that concern both the explanation of an appella-
tion and the legal status of beverages. In this sense, it is less a straightforward 
lexicographical work and more a mixture of adab and fiqh. 
ʿAbd al-Malik b. Ḥabīb’s Tafsīr gharīb al-Muwaṭṭaʾ also refers to Abū 
ʿUbayd but is completely different in structure. It frames the commentary 
in question-and-answer sequences. This narrative structure is typical for 
other legal traditions as well. Thematic chapters, such as that on prayer or 
purity, have anonymous interlocuters who ask ʿAbd al-Malik about specific 
hadiths: wa-saʾalnā ʿAbd al-Malik b. Ḥabīb ʿan sharḥ ḥadīth Mālik, and are 
then followed by the isnād and quotation of the relevant hadith, and end 
with ʿAbd al-Malik’s answer (qāla ʿAbd al-Malik). Dealing with juridical 
issues, the Tafsīr gharīb al-Muwaṭṭaʾ digresses from lexicographic com-
mentary to other topics.
Many later authors include less linguistic material on beverages than 
Abū ʿUbayd or Ibn Qutayba. In his gharīb book on Mālik’s Muwaṭṭaʾ, the 
Andalusian ʿAbd al-Malik b. Ḥabīb dedicates a few pages to the topic of pro-
hibited beverages under the thematic section entitled Sharḥ gharīb kitāb 
al-ashriba.102 The interlocutors ask about the prohibition of vessels (dubbāʾ 
and muzaffat) in producing nabīdh, as articulated in a hadith transmitted 
by Ibn ʿUmar. ʿAbd al-Malik b. Ḥabīb offers several answers in reply to 
this query about vessels and beverages; these replies are always introduced 
by qāla ʿAbd al-Malik. After a brief explanation of dubbāʾ, muzaffat, and 
ḥantam, he comments that these vessels are forbidden if they contain a 
prohibited beverage. He then explains bitʿ, al-ghubayrāʾ (al-sukurka, made 
from wheat, qamḥ) and mizr, which is made from sorghum (dhura), and 
adds that Muḥammad forbade these beverages if they were intoxicating. 
The third thematic complex refers to faḍīkh, which was known as a bev-
erage of mixed substances (khalīṭayn). ʿAbd al-Malik points out that in 
contrast to these beverages, faḍīkh would be prohibited even if it were not 
intoxicating. In short, there is less material on beverage names; rather the 
key issue is their legal status.
Later authors switched to more user-friendly arrangements based on 
formal criteria. Al-Zamakhsharī’s al-Fāʾiq is arranged according to the first 
two radicals of the word. If a lemma is not discussed under its radicals, 
al-Zamakhsharī usually offers a cross-reference to the hadith in which it 
appears. Qāḍī ʿIyāḍ’s Mashāriq al-anwār is arranged by all the radicals of 
the word. 
101 Ibn Qutayba, Kitāb al-Ashriba.
102 ʿAbd al-Malik, Tafsīr gharīb al-Muwaṭṭaʾ, 2:428–431.
40 
STEFANIE BRINKMANN

  
BETWEEN PHILOLOGY AND HADITH CRITICISM 
41
Further east, in sixth-/twelfth-century Baghdad, Ibn al-Jawzī expressed 
his criticism of many of the founding fathers of the gharīb al-ḥadīth genre 
by accusing them of leaving out a large body of material. In this, he differs 
here from other authors who pointed out flaws and lacunae in previous 
works, but also praised the merits of the founding authors. Ibn al-Jawzī’s 
criticism of al-Harawī might be the harshest, but even Abū ʿUbayd al-Qāsim 
b. Sallām is not exempt from his reproof: ‘Then came Abū ʿUbayd al-Qāsim 
b. Sallām and authored this scattered and miscellaneous information and 
added to it and expanded the book until he thought that nothing was left 
of [noteworthy] gharīb. But in this, he failed in many ways.’103 Ibn al-Jawzī 
promises to make up for all these flaws by leaving out nothing, so that his 
book, which follows an alphabetical order, may serve as a substitute for 
previous works. This presumptuousness is criticised by his contempo-
rary Ibn al-Athīr. Ibn al-Athīr quotes Ibn al-Jawzī’s claim to make up for 
his predecessors’ flaws verbatim and then states, regarding Ibn al-Jawzī’s 
book, ‘. . . and I recognised that it is merely an abridgement (mukhtaṣar) 
of al-Harawī’s book, picking from bits and pieces of its chapters, adding 
nothing more than some scattered words or isolated formulations’.104 In 
fact Ibn al-Athīr’s al-Nihāya became the pinnacle of the gharīb al-ḥadīth 
genre, with most successor works being adaptations of some kind. A stan-
dard work in madrasas for hadith study and a reference book for jurists 
or theologians, its detailed introduction (muqaddima) is a source for the 
history of the genre until today. Alongside Abū ʿUbayd and Ibn Qutayba’s 
Gharīb al-ḥadīth and al-Harawī’s Gharībayn, al-Nihāya is the most widely 
disseminated gharīb al-ḥadīth book and the work that inspires the most 
adaptations (abridgements, versifications, etc.). 
The later, alphabetically arranged gharīb al-ḥadīth books usually contain 
fewer vocabulary terms on beverages – they repeat some terms that were 
mentioned by Abū ʿUbayd, but not all the names registered in his Gharīb, 
nor do they add new names. For example, al-Zamakhsharī only briefly 
explains bādhaq by quoting Ibn ʿAbbās’s answer to a question regarding 
it: ‘Muḥammad was before the bādhaq’, meaning that Muḥammad lived 
before the name of this beverage became known in the region, and that 
‘whatever intoxicates, that is forbidden’.105 Al-Zamakhsharī then explains 
that bādhaq is an Arabicised Persian word, bādha (bāde, wine), and that 
this corresponds to khamr. The only other word he discusses from Abū 
ʿUbayd’s list is mizr (beer). He quotes a hadith in which people from 
Yemen complain that their work cultivating the land and the cold is so 
difficult that they could not manage their labour without this beverage, to 
103 Ibn al-Jawzī, Gharīb al-ḥadīth, 1:2.
104 Ibn al-Athīr, al-Nihāya, 1:9–10.
105 Al-Zamakhsharī, al-Fāʾiq, 1:90. 

 which the Prophet said: ‘Everything intoxicating is forbidden.’106 In sum, 
al-Zamakhsharī has far fewer terms and for those he does list, he differs 
from Abū ʿUbayd by quoting different hadith material. 
Ibn al-Jawzī only discusses bādhaq107 as a kind of (intoxicating) bever-
age, and sukurka,108 for which he cites Abū Mūsā as stating that it is the 
wine (khamr) of the Abyssinians (al-Ḥabasha). He quotes Abū ʿUbayd’s 
statement that it is made from sorghum (dhura) and al-Azharī’s claim that 
the word is not Arabic. Thus, he includes less lexicographic material, and  
it is not related to any kind of legal commentary. 
In contrast to al-Zamakhsharī and Ibn al-Jawzī, Ibn al-Athīr includes 
most of the beverages Abū ʿUbayd addresses, although some, such as ṭilāʾ, 
are missing. He also discusses bukhtuj,109 mizr110 and sukurka,111 and quotes 
further traditions to identify the ingredients of the beverages and the ety-
mologies of their names. In doing so, he cites predecessors from other 
fields of knowledge, such as the lexicographer al-Jawharī and al-Harawī, 
the author of a gharīb al-ḥadīth book. While Abū ʿUbayd and Ibn Qutabya 
abandoned the lexicographic approach in favour of legal commentary, 
Ibn al-Athīr’s commentary has an outwardly lexicographic function. This 
might be because of the ongoing formation of Islamic law during the life-
times of Abū ʿUbayd and Ibn Qutabya, while later scholars such as Ibn 
al-Athīr could concentrate more on lexicography, since by Ibn al-Athīr’s 
time there were many legal treatises on beverages and the Qur’anic prohi-
bition of alcohol. Notably, the gharīb al-ḥadīth books of the later scholars 
lack discussions of other aspects of hadith as a science; that is, discussions 
of specific transmitters, variants, ways of transmission and such. It is the 
later, more extensive hadith commentaries that merged these issues.
Conclusion
In his edition of Ibn Quṭlūbughā’s (d. 879/1474) Gharīb al-Qurʾān, the 
editor ʿAlī al-Ḥafīsha states that ‘gharīb al-Qurʾān books can be consid-
ered the first module for the composition of the extensive commentar-
ies (tafāsīr muṭawwala)’.112 In a similar vein, gharīb al-ḥadīth books can 
be considered the starting point for more detailed, multi-thematic had-
ith commentaries that encompass, to varying degrees, issues of language 
(lexicography and grammar), variant readings, chains of transmission and 
106 Al-Zamakhsharī, al-Fāʾiq, 3:363. 
107 Ibn al-Jawzī, Gharīb al-ḥadīth, 1:62.
108 Ibn al-Jawzī, Gharīb al-ḥadīth, 1:488.
109 Ibn al-Athīr, al-Nihāya, 1:101.
110 Ibn al-Athīr, al-Nihāya, 4:324.
111 Ibn al-Athīr, al-Nihāya, 2:383.
112 Ibn Quṭlūbughā, Gharīb al-Qurʾān, 4.
42 
STEFANIE BRINKMANN

  
BETWEEN PHILOLOGY AND HADITH CRITICISM 
43
transmitters, the significance and meaning of legal reasoning, theology and 
other topics, as well as diverging attitudes among scholars. As noted, the 
boundary between studies dedicated to hadith lexicography and those that 
also address further issues of explanation or interpretation can be fluid at 
times. While many of these works remain unpublished and inaccessible 
even as digitised manuscripts, the exact categorisation of specific works 
called gharīb al-ḥadīth requires further research. As the nucleus of more 
extensive hadith commentary and a specialised dictionary for the study of 
traditions, gharīb al-ḥadīth works were widely transmitted, read and stud-
ied from al-Andalus to the Balkans, to India and throughout the Middle 
East. In addition to the transmission and reception of individual books, 
their content has also survived through other paths of transmission; it has 
been incorporated into thematically or alphabetically organised dictionar-
ies, such as al-Mukhaṣṣaṣ and Lisān al-ʿArab, in works of ʿulūm al-ḥadīth 
and hadith criticism, and in proper, more extensive hadith commentaries. 
Gharīb al-ḥadīth works can be classified roughly as follows: the first and 
basic works were written in the second/eighth and third/ninth centuries, 
and critical revisions and supplements were composed from the late third/
ninth to the fourth/tenth century and up to the early seventh/thirteenth 
century (for this era, Ibn al-Athīr represents the example par excellence). 
After the seventh/thirteenth century, a few gharīb al-ḥadīth compilations 
were based on later, post-canonical hadith collections, but most books were 
adaptations of the books of the second/eighth to seventh/thirteenth centu-
ries (usually abridgements, extracts or versifications). While the produc-
tion of ‘Sunnī’ gharīb al-ḥadīth had slowed down by the tenth-/sixteenth 
century, Shīʿī books of this genre were produced from the Ṣafavid period 
on (907–1135/1501–1722); this activity endured at least into the twentieth 
century. The only early Shīʿī gharīb book is attributed to the fourth-/tenth-
century scholar Ibn Bābawayh. Note that, just as it is almost impossible 
to map geographical borders for the transmission of these texts due to the 
transregional dissemination of most works, a sharp divide between ‘Sunnī’ 
and ‘Shīʿī’ gharīb al-hadīth texts is artificial, as most Shīʿī scholars used the 
books of Sunnī authors when discussing lexicography of the matn.
During the Umayyad and ʿAbbāsid period, Iraq was the production 
centre for gharīb al-ḥadīth books. This is no surprise, given that Kufa and 
Basra were early philological centres and Baghdad became the centre for 
scholarship from the third/ninth century on. In terms of the authors’ prov-
enance and their production of gharīb al-ḥadīth works, Iran and especially 
greater Khurāsān in the east, and al-Andalus in the west, can be considered 
particularly important for the genre in ʿAbbāsid times. Due to political and 
economic developments, the centre of gharīb al-ḥadīth production was 
transferred to Mamlūk Egypt and Syria in the eighth/fourteenth and ninth/
fifteenth centuries. Patronage and the complex interrelations between the 

 Turkish elite, scholars as civil servants and the Arabophone population 
enabled a vivid cultural and intellectual life, despite political and economic 
crises and recurrent waves of the plague. In the Ottoman period, no major 
noteworthy work was written in this genre, but many earlier works were 
preserved as references for the study of hadith, law and lexicography. They 
were studied in madrasas and kept in most libraries, representing a key 
source for teaching and learning. Already at the time of the founding fig-
ures of the genre, gharīb al-ḥadīth texts were transmitted from al-Andalus 
to Iran; this enormous dissemination of gharīb al-ḥadīth books continued 
throughout the following centuries. Future research in libraries in India 
and sub-Saharan Africa will surely add to this picture. 
Gharīb al-ḥadīth works share certain characteristics with other, more 
extensive commentaries; they build upon each other, intertextuality is often 
strong, and the goal of both this genre and the commentaries is to explain 
the content to the contemporary public. In this sense, gharīb al-ḥadīth 
books represent a continuous ‘rereading’ of previous texts as an adaptation 
to contemporary needs and serve as a control over this tradition. 
Bibliography
Primary Sources
ʿAbd al-Malik b. Ḥabīb b. Sulaymān al-Sulamī. Tafsīr gharīb al-Muwaṭṭaʾ. Edited 
by ʿAbd al-Raḥmān b. Sulaymān al-ʿUthmaynīn. 2 vols. Riyadh: Maktabat 
al-ʿAbīkān, 1421/2001.
Abū ʿUbayd al-Qāsim b. Sallām. Gharīb al-ḥadīth. Edited by Ḥusayn Muḥammad 
Muḥammad Sharaf and ʿAbd al-Sallām Muḥammad Hārūn. 6 vols. Cairo: 
al-Hayʾa al-ʿĀmma li-Shuʾūn al-Maṭābiʿ al-Amīriyya, 1404–15/1984–94.
Abū ʿUbayd al-Qāsim b. Sallām. Gharīb al-ḥadīth. Edited by Muḥammad ʿAbd 
al-Muʿīd Khān. 4 vols. Hyderabad: Dāʾirat al-Maʿārif al-ʿUthmāniyya, 1384/1964. 
Reprint of Beirut: Dār al-Kitāb al-ʿArabī. 
Bīrjandī, Ḥusayn al-Ḥasanī. Gharīb al-ḥadīth fī Bihār al-anwār. Tehran: Markaz-i 
Buḥūth-i Dār al-Ḥadīth, 1421/2000–01. 
Ḥājjī Khalīfa = Kātib Čelebī, Ismāʿīl Bāshā. Kashf al-ẓunūn. Beirut: Dār Iḥyāʾ 
al-Turāth al-ʿArabī, n.d. 
al-Harawī, Abū ʿUbayd Aḥmad. Kitāb al-Gharībayn fī al-Qurʾān wa-l-ḥadīth. 
Edited by Aḥmad Farīd al-Mazīdī. 6 vols. Mecca and Riyadh: Maktaba Nizār 
Muṣṭafā al-Bāz, 1419/1999.
Ibn al-Athīr, Majd al-Dīn. al-Nihāya fī gharīb al-ḥadīth wa-l-athar. Edited  
by Ṭāhir Aḥmad al-Zāwī and Maḥmūd Muḥammad al-Ṭanāḥī. 5 vols. Beirut: 
al-Maktaba al-ʿIlmiyya, 1399/1979.
Ibn Fūrak, Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan al-Iṣbahānī. Mushkil al-ḥadīth wa-bayānuhū. 
Edited by Mūsā Muḥammad ʿAlī. Beirut: ʿĀlim al-Kutub, 1405/1985.
Ibn Ḥajar = al-ʿAsqalānī, Aḥmad b. ʿAlī b. Ḥajar. Fatḥ al-Bārī fī sharḥ Ṣaḥīḥ al-Imām 
Abī ʿAbdallāh Muḥammad b. Ismāʿīl al-Bukhārī. Edited by ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz b. 
44 
STEFANIE BRINKMANN

  
BETWEEN PHILOLOGY AND HADITH CRITICISM 
45
ʿAbdallāh b. Bāz, Muḥammad Fuʾād ʿAbd al-Bāqī, and Muḥibb al-Dīn al-Khaṭīb. 
13 vols. Cairo: al-Maktaba al-Salafiyya, n.d.
Ibn Ḥajar = al-ʿAsqalānī, Aḥmad b. ʿAlī b Ḥajar. Hadi al-sārī. Edited by ʿAbd al-Qādir 
Shayba al-Ḥamad. Riyadh: Maktabat al-Malik Fahd al-Waṭaniyya, 2000. 
Ibn al-Jawzī, Abū al-Faraj ʿAbd al-Raḥmān. Gharīb al-ḥadīth. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub 
al-ʿIlmiyya, 1425/2004.
Ibn Khaldūn, Walī al-Dīn ʿAbd al-Raḥmān b. Muḥammad. Muqaddima Ibn 
Khaldūn. Edited by ʿAbdallāh Muḥammad al-Darwīsh. Damascus: Dār Yaʿrib, 
1325/2004.
Ibn Khallikān, Aḥmad b. Muḥammad. Wafayāt al-aʿyān wa-anbāʾ abnāʾ al-zamān. 
Edited by Iḥsān ʿAbbās. 8 vols. Beirut: Dār Ṣādir, 1397–98/1977–78.
[Ibn] al-Nadīm, Abū al-Faraj Muḥammad b. Isḥāq. al-Fihrist. Edited by Ayman Fuʾād 
Sayyid. 4 vols. London: al-Furqān Islamic Heritage Foundation, 1430/2009.
Ibn Qutayba, Abū Muḥammad ʿAbdallāh b. Muslim al-Dīnawarī. Gharīb al-ḥadīth. 
Edited by ʿAbdallāh al-Jabūrī. 2 vols. Baghdad: Maṭbaʿa al-ʿĀnī, 1397/1977.
Ibn Qutayba, Abū Muḥammad ʿAbdallāh b. Muslim al-Dīnawarī. Kitāb al-Ashriba 
wa-dhikr ikhtilāf al-nās fīhā. Edited by Yāsīn Muḥammad al-Sawwās. Damascus: 
Dār al-Fikr, 1420/1999.
Ibn Qutayba, Abū Muḥammad ʿAbdallāh b. Muslim al-Dīnawarī. al-Masāʾil  
wa-l-ajwiba fī al-ḥadīth wa-l-tafsīr. Edited by Marwān al-ʿAṭiyya and Muḥsin 
Kharāba. Beirut: Dār Ibn Kathīr, n.d.
Ibn Qutayba, Abū Muḥammad ʿAbdallāh b. Muslim al-Dīnawarī. Taʾwīl mukhta-
lif al-ḥadīth. Edited by Ibn Usāma Salīm b. ʿUlyad al-Hilālī. Riyadh: Dār Ibn 
Qayyim and Cairo: Dār Ibn ʿAfān, 1430/2009.
Ibn Quṭlūbughā. Gharīb al-Qurʾān. Edited by ʿAbd al-Muʾmin Abū al-ʿAynayn ʿAlī 
al-Ḥafīsha. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyya, 1971. 
al-Khaṭṭābī, Abū Sulaymān Ḥamd b. Muḥammad. Gharīb al-ḥadīth. Edited 
by ʿAbd al-Karīm Ibrāhīm al-ʿUzbāwī. 2 vols. Mecca: Jāmiʿa Umm al-Qura, 
1402/1982.
Qāḍī ʿIyāḍ, Mūsā. Mashāriq al-anwār ʿalā ṣiḥāḥ al-āthār. 2 vols. Tunis: al-Maktaba 
al-ʿAtīqa and Cairo: Dār al-Turāth, 1975.
al-Qiftī, Jamāl al-Dīn Abū al-Ḥasan ʿAlī b. Yūsuf. Inbāh al-ruwāt ʿalā anbāh 
al-nuḥāt. Edited by Muḥammad Abū al-Faḍl Ibrāhīm. Cairo: Dār al-Fikr 
al-ʿArabī and Beirut: Muʾassasa al-Kutub al-Thaqāfiyya 1406/1986.
al-Sakhāwī, Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad. Jawāhir wa-l-durar fī tarjama Shaykh 
al-Islām Ibn Ḥajar. Edited by Ibrāhīm Bājis ʿAbd al-Majīd. Beirut: Dār Ibn 
Ḥazm, 1999.
al-Ṭībī, al-Ḥusayn b. Muḥammad Sharaf al-Dīn al-Dimashqī. al-Khulāṣa fī maʿrifat 
al-ḥadīth. Edited by Abū ʿĀṣim al-Shawāmī al-Atharī. Cairo: al-Maktaba 
al-Islāmiyya, 1430/2009.
al-Zamakhsharī, Maḥmūd b. ʿUmar. al-Fāʾiq fī gharīb al-ḥadīth. Edited by ʿAlī 
Muḥammad al-Bajāwī and Muḥammad Abū al-Faḍl Ibrāhīm, 4 vols. Cairo: 
ʿĪsā al-Bābī al-Ḥalabī, 1971.
al-Zubaydī, Abū Bakr b. Muḥammad al-Andalusī. Ṭabaqāt al-naḥwiyyīn  
wa-l-lughawiyyīn. Edited by Muḥammad Abū al-Faḍl Ibrāhīm. Cairo: Dār 
al-Maʿārif 1984.

 Secondary Literature
Akmaluddin, Muhammad. ‘The Epistemology of Sharḥ Hadith in al-Andalus in the 
Second to the Third Century ah: A Book Study of Tafsîr Gharîb al-Muwaṭṭa 
by ‘Abd al-Malik bin Ḥabîb.’ Jurnal Ushuluddin 26, no. 2 (2018): 113–129. doi: 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.24014/jush.v26i2.5374>.
ʿAllūsh, ʿAbd al-Sallām Muḥammad. Al-Jāmiʿ fī gharīb al-ḥadīth, wa-yashtamalu 
al-matn ʿalā al-Nihāya li-Ibn al-Athīr, wa-l-ḥāshiya ʿalā Gharīb al-ḥadīth 
li-Ibn ʿUbayd, wa-Gharīb al-ḥadīth wa-Iṣlāḥ ghalaṭ Abī ʿUbayd kullayhimā 
li-Ibn Qutayba, wa-Iṣlāḥ ghalaṭ al-muḥaddithayn li-l-Khaṭṭābī, wa-l-Fāʾiq li-l-
Zamakhsharī, wa-Iʿrāb al-ḥadīth li-l-ʿUkbarī. 5 vols. Riyadh: al-Maktaba al-
Rushd, 1422/2001.
Baalbaki, Ramzi. The Arabic Lexicographical Tradition. From the 2nd/8th to the 
12th/18th century. Leiden: Brill, 2014.
Badr al-Dīn, Umaymah Rashīd. Ibn al-Athīr al-muḥaddith: wa-manhajuhu 
fī itab (al-Nihāya fī gharīb al-ḥadīth wa-l-athar). Beirut: Dār al-Nawādir 
al-Lubnāniyya, 2014.
Bauden, Frédéric. ‘al-Ṭabarī, Aḥmad b. ʿAbd Allāh.’ In EI2, 10: 16–17.
Blecher, Joel. Said the Prophet of God: Ḥadīth Commentary across a Millennium. 
Oakland, CA: University of California Press, 2018.
Brinkmann, Stefanie. ‘Beer in Early Islam. A Ḥadīṯ Perspective.’ Arabist 36 (2015): 
3–34.
Brinkmann, Stefanie. ‘Wine in Ḥadīth. From Intoxication to Sobriety.’ In Bert G. 
Fragner, Ralph Kauz, Florian Schwarz (eds), Wine Culture in Iran and Beyond. 
Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philosophisch-Historische 
Klasse, Sitzungsberichte, 852. Band. Veröffentlichungen zur Iranistik. Heraus-
gegeben von Bert G. Fragner und Florian Schwarz 75, pp. 71–135. Vienna: Ver-
lag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 2014. 
Broadbridge, Anne. ‘Academic Rivalries and the Patronage System in Fifteenth-
Century Egypt: al-ʿAynī, al-Maqrīzī, and Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī.’ Mamlūk Stud-
ies Review 3 (1999): 85–107.
Brockelmann, Carl. Geschichte der arabischen Litteratur (GAL), vol. 1: Weimar: 
Felber 1898; vol. 2: Berlin: Felber 1902; Suppl. 1, Leiden: Brill, 1937; Suppl. 2, 
Leiden: Brill, 1938; Suppl. 3, Leiden: Brill, 1942.
Brockopp, Jonathan. Muhammad’s Heirs: The Rise of Muslim Scholarly Communi-
ties, 622–950. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2017.
Brown, Jonathan A. C. Hadith: Muhammad’s Legacy in the Medieval and Modern 
World. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009.
Bulliet, R. ‘Conversion to Islam and the Emergence of a Muslim Society in Iran.’ 
In N. Levtzion (ed.), Conversion to Islam: A Comparative Study of Islamization, 
pp. 30–51. New York: Holmes and Meier, 1979.
Carter, M. G. ‘Arabic Lexicography.’ In M. J. L. Young, J. D. Latham, and R. 
B. Serjeant (eds), Religion, Learning and Science in the ‘Abbasid Period,  
pp. 106–117. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990.
Daniel, E. L. ‘Conversion II: of Iranians to Islam’, in Eir, 6:229–232.
Demirel, Serda [Sardār Dimīrl]. ʿUlūm al-ḥadīth bayna ahl al-sunna wa-l-jamāʿa wa-l-
shīʿa al-imāmiyya al-ithnā ʿashariyya. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyya, 1434/2013.
46 
STEFANIE BRINKMANN

  
BETWEEN PHILOLOGY AND HADITH CRITICISM 
47
Drory, Rina. ‘The Abbasid Construction of the Jahiliyya: Cultural Authority in the 
Making.’ Studia Islamica 83 (1996): 33–49.
Fierro, Isabel. ‘The Introduction of Ḥadīth in al-Andalus (2nd/8th–3rd/9th centuries).’ 
Der Islam 66, no. 1 (1989): 68–93.
Al-Fihris al-shāmil li-l-turāth al-ʿarabī al-islāmī al-makhṭūṭ. Vol. 2. Al-Ḥadīth 
al-nabawī al-sharīf wa-ʿulūmuhu wa-rijāluhu. Edited by Muʾassasa Āl al-Bayt, 
pp. 1130–1131. Oman: Muʾassasa Āl al-Bayt, 1991.
Göktaş, Recep Gürkan. ‘On the Ḥadīth Collection of Bayezid II’s Palace Library.’ 
In Gülru Necipoğlu, Cemal Kafadar and Cornell H. Fleischer (eds), Treasures 
of Knowledge: An Inventory of the Ottoman Palace Library (1502/3–1503/4). 
Vol. 1: Essays, pp. 309–340. Leiden and Boston: Brill, 2019.
Hagemann, Hannah-Lena and Stefan Heidemann (eds). Transregional and 
Regional Elites: Connecting the Early Islamic Empire. Vol. 1: The Early Islamic 
Empire at Work. Studies in the History of Culture in the Middle East 36. Berlin: 
De Gruyter, 2020.
Al-Ḥibshī [al-Ḥabashī], ʿAbdallāh Muḥammad. Jāmiʿ al-shurūḥ wa-l-ḥawāshī: 
Muʿjam shāmil li-asmaʾ al-kutub al-mashrūḥa fī al-turāth al-islāmī wa-bayān 
shurūḥihā. Abu Dhabi: al-Majmaʿ al-Thaqāfī, 1425/2004.
Hirschler, Konrad. Medieval Damascus: Plurality and Diversity in an Arabic Library. 
The Ashrafīya Catalogue. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2016.
Hirschler, Konrad. A Monument to Medieval Syrian Book Culture: The Library of 
Ibn ʿAbd al-Hādī. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2020.
Hosein, M. Hidayet. ‘al-Muttaḳī al-Hindī.’ In EI2, 7:800–801.
Isḥāq, ʿAlī Shawwākh. Muʿjam muṣannafāt al-Qurʾān al-karīm. Vol. 3. Riyadh: Dār 
al-Rifāʿī, 1404/1984.
Kaḥḥāla, ʿUmar ar-Riḍā. Muʿjam al-muʾallifīn. Edited by Maktabat al-Muthannā. 
15 vols. Beirut: Maktabat al-Muthannā, 2010. 
Al-Kattānī, ʿAbd al-Ḥayy b. ʿAbd al-Kabīr. Fihris al-Fahāris wa-l-athbāt wa-muʿjam 
al-maʿājim wa-mashyakhāt wa-musalsalāt. Edited by Iḥsān ʿAbbās. Beirut: Dār 
al-Gharb al-Islāmī, 1402/1982.
Khan, Ahmad. ‘An Empire of Elites: Mobility in the Early Islamic Empire.’ In 
Hannah-Lena Hagemann and Stefan Heidemann (eds), Transregional and 
Regional Elites: Connecting the Early Islamic Empire. Vol. 1: The Early Islamic 
Empire at Work, pp. 147–169. Series: Studies in the History of Culture in the 
Middle East 36. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2020.
Kueny, Kathryn. The Rhetoric of Sobriety: Wine in Early Islam. Albany: State  
University of New York Press, 2001.
Lecker, Michael. ‘Biographical Notes on Abū ʿUbayda Maʿmar al-Muthannā.’  
Studia Islamica 81 (1995): 71–100.
Lecomte, Gérard. ‘A propos de la itabence des ouvrages d’Ibn Qutayba sur le Hadit 
aux Vie/XIIe et VIIe/XIIIe siècles. Les certificats de lecture du K. Garib al-Hadit et 
du K. Islah al-Galat fi Garib al-Hadit li-Abi ‘Ubayd al-Qasim b. Sallam.’ Bulletin 
d’Études Orientales 21 (1968): 347–409.
Lewicka, Paulina. Food and Foodways of Medieval Cairenes: Aspects of Life in an 
Islamic Metropolis of the Eastern Mediterranean. Leiden and Boston: Brill, 2011.
Madelung, Wilferd. ‘Abū ʿUbayda Maʿmar b. al-Muthannā as Historian.’ Journal of 
Islamic Studies 3 (1992): 47–56.

 Maraqten, Muhammad. ‘Wine Drinking and Wine Prohibition in Arabia before 
Islam.’ Proceedings of the Seminar for Arabian Studies 23 (1993): 95–115.
Mīrah, Maḥmūd Aḥmad. Fihris gharīb al-ḥadīth li-Abī ʿUbayd al-Qāsim b. Sallām 
al-Harawī (157–224H). Beirut: Dār al-Bashāʾir al-Islāmiyya, 1987. 
Mottahedeh, Roy. ‘The Transmission of Learning: The Role of the Islamic 
Northeast.’ In Nicole Grandin and Marc Gaborieau (eds), Madrasa: La 
transmission du savoir dans le monde Musulman, pp. 63–72. Paris: Editions 
Arguments, 1997.
Motzki, Harald. ‘The Role of Non-Arab Converts in the Development of Early 
Islamic Law.’ Islamic Law and Society 6, no. 3 (1999): 293–317.
Naṣṣār, Ḥusayn. Maʿājim ʿalā al-mauḍūʿāt. Kuwait: Maṭbaʿa Ḥukūma al-Kuwayt, 
1405/1985.
Naṣṣār, Ḥusayn. Al-Muʿjam al-ʿarabī: Nash’atuhu wa-taṭawwuruhu. Cairo: Dār 
Miṣr li-l-Ṭibāʿa, 1408/1988.
Nawas, John. ‘The Birth of an Elite: Mawālī and Arab ʿUlamāʾ.’ Jerusalem Studies 
in Arabic and Islam 31 (2006): 74–91.
Necipoğlu, Gülru, Cemal Kafadar, Cornell H. Fleischer (eds). Treasures of Knowl-
edge: An Inventory of the Ottoman Palace Library (1502/3–1503/4). Vol. 1: 
Essays. Leiden and Boston: Brill, 2019.
Paul, Jürgen. ‘Islam in Iran von 632–1500.’ In Ludwig Paul (ed.), Handbuch der 
Iranistik. Bd. 2, pp. 253–265. Wiesbaden: Reichert Verlag, 2017.
Petry, Carl. ‘A Paradox of Patronage during the Later Mamluk Period.’ Muslim 
World 73 (1983): 182–207.
Qutbuddin, Tahera. ‘Books on Arabic Philology and Literature: A Teaching  
Collection Focused on Religious Learning and the State Chancery.’ In Gülru 
Necipoğlu, Cemal Kafadar, Cornell H. Fleischer (eds), Treasures of Knowledge: 
An Inventory of the Ottoman Palace Library (1502/3–1503/4). Vol. 1: Essays, 
pp. 607–634. Leiden and Boston: Brill, 2019.
Rante, Rocco (ed.). Greater Khorasan: History, Geography, Archaeology and Mate-
rial Culture. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2015.
Scheiner, Jens and Damien Janos (eds). The Place to Go: Contexts of Learning in 
Baghdad 750–1000 ce Studies in Late Antiquity and Early Islam. Princeton, 
NJ: Darwin Press, 2014.
Sezgin, Fuat. Geschichte des arabischen Schrifttums (GAS). 17 vols. Leiden: Brill, 
1967–2015.
Shalabī, ʿAbd al-ʿĀṭī. Al-Khaṭṭābī wa-gharīb al-ḥadīth. [Egypt?]: al-Maktab al-Jāmiʿ 
al-Ḥadīth, 2006.
al-Suḥaybānī, ʿAlī b. ʿUmar. Al-Taʾwīl fī gharīb al-ḥadīth: min khilāl itab al-Nihāya 
li-Ibn al-Athīr. Riyadh: Maktaba al-Rushd Nāshirūn, 2009.
Suleiman, Yasir. Arabic in the Fray: Language Ideology and Cultural Politics.  
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2013.
Suleiman, Yasir. ‘Ideology, Grammar-Making and the Standardization of Arabic.’ 
In Bilal Orfali (ed.), In the Shadow of Arabic: The Centrality of Language to 
Arabic Culture. Studies Presented to Ramzi Baalbaki on the Occasion of His 
Sixtieth Birthday, pp. 3–30. Studies in Semitic Languages and Linguistics 63. 
Leiden: Brill, 2011.
48 
STEFANIE BRINKMANN

  
BETWEEN PHILOLOGY AND HADITH CRITICISM 
49
al-Ṭihrānī, Muḥammad Muḥsin b. ʿAlī Āqā Buzurg. al-Dharīʿa ilā taṣānīf al-Shīʿa. 
25 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Aḍwāʾ, 1403–06/1983–86. 
Witkam, Jan Just. ‘The Oldest Known Dated Arabic Manuscript on Paper  
(dated Dhu al-Qaʿda 252 (866 ad).’ <http://www.islamicmanuscripts.info/E-
publications/witkam_oldest_dated/index.html>, accessed July 2020.
Zaydī, Kāṣid Yāsir. Manhaj Abī ʿUbayd fī tafsīr Gharīb al-ḥadīth. Leeds: Majallat 
al-Ḥikma, 1999.
al-Ziriklī, Khayr al-Dīn Ibn Maḥmūd. al-Aʿlām: Qāmūs tarājim li-ashhar al-rijāl 
wa-l-nisāʾ min al-ʿArab wa-l-mustaʿribīn wa-l-mustashriqīn. 8 vols. Beirut: Dār 
al-ʿIlm al-Malāyīn, 2002.

 CHAPTER 2
The Hermeneutics of al-Sharīf al-
Murtaḍā: The Interpretation of akhbār 
al-āḥād in Kitāb al-Amālī
Ali Aghaei*
Introduction
For Shīʿīs, hadiths (often rendered as ‘traditions’) and akhbār (sg. khabar, 
‘reports’) that describe words, actions or habits of infallible figures, includ-
ing the Prophet Muhammad and the Shīʿī Imams, are considered the most 
important sources on theological and legal issues because they are seen 
to hold divine knowledge.1 Therefore, it has long been an essential chal-
lenge for Shīʿī scholars to determine the authenticity of traditions and 
reports. A common criterion involves examining whether the tradition is 
a ‘concurrent report’ (khabar mutawātir or has been narrated by a limited 
number of transmitters, thus a ‘single, isolated tradition’ (khabar al-wāḥid,  
pl. akhbār al-āḥād).2 If it is a concurrent report, the tradition is well attested 
and thus considered authentic, but what about a single, isolated tradition? 
Among the leading scholars of the Būyid period, two distinct attitudes 
toward isolated traditions are discernible: A ‘traditionalist’ attitude and a 
‘rationalist’ position. Proponents of the traditionalist view endorsed the  
 * This is a revised version of an article that I published in Persian together with my col-
league Mehrdad Abbasi as ‘Principles and Method of al-Sharīf al-Murtaḍā in Under-
standing of Akhbār al-Āḥād: The Case of al-Amālī’, Ṣaḥīfa-yi Mubīn 46 (2010–11): 
175–195. I have significantly improved the former article in various ways, particularly 
in terms of source material and argumentation, and I have contextualised al-Murtaḍā’s 
ideas in the wider scope of early theories of Islamic hermeneutics. I am grateful to Devin 
J. Stewart for his meticulous reading and correcting my English text, to Ramon Harvey 
for his valuable comments, and Andreas Ismail Mohr for his careful proofreading. 
 1 See Kohlberg, ‘Introduction’, 165. 
 2 In short, khabar al-wāḥid is a report that falls short of the predicate mutawātir in that 
it has only one or a few transmitters at each stage (ṭabaqa) of its isnād; see Juynboll, 
‘Khabar al-Wāḥid’; Pavlovitch, ‘Ḥadīth: 7.1.1. Mutawātir/khabar al-wāḥid’.

  
THE HERMENEUTICS OF AL-SHARĪF AL-MURTAḍĀ 
51
authority of khabar al-wāḥid, while proponents of the rationalist view 
regarded it as inadmissible.3 
Al-Sharīf al-Murtaḍā rejected the traditionalist attitude and adopted 
Muʿtazilī ideas regarding the fundamental place of reason (ʿaql) in the 
establishment of religious knowledge. He did not accept the authority of 
khabar al-wāḥid; in fact, he rejected them with both rational and scrip-
tural arguments. Yet in his works he interpreted these kinds of reports and 
traditions. In this chapter I explore al-Sharīf al-Murtaḍā’s hermeneuti-
cal approach to akhbār al-āḥād to present his principles and methods of 
interpreting traditions. In order to address his theoretical principles, I first 
investigate al-Murtaḍā’s views on the authority of khabar al-wāḥid and 
then discuss some examples of his interpretations of traditions. 
The focus of this chapter is al-Murtaḍā’s magnum opus, Ghurar 
al-fawāʾid wa-durar al-qalāʾid, known as Amālī al-Murtaḍā. This book 
belongs to the dictations (amālī) genre4 in Arabic literature; it contains 
eighty dictation sessions (majlis, pl. majālis) in addition to a sizeable 
appendix (takmila). In each session, al-Murtaḍā discusses the interpreta-
tion of a Qur’anic verse and/or a prophetic tradition that poses a challenge 
to his theology, explains a rare linguistic occurrence or presents a compel-
ling stylistic case.5 In each instance, al-Murtaḍā lists a variety of views to 
provide a vivid image of the scholarly debate on the question, and then 
presents his own interpretation, which he supports with evidence from 
Arabic literature and poetry. In this study, I examine twenty-eight tradi-
tions in sections entitled ‘interpretation of a tradition’ (taʾwīl khabar) and 
six additional traditions in al-Murtaḍā’s appendix under the general title 
‘question’ (masʾala) in al-Murtaḍā’s Amālī.6
 3 The authority of khabar al-wāḥid as a source of religious knowledge was a topic of 
contention between the Muʿtazilīs and ahl al-ḥadīth. While the ahl al-ḥadīth assumed 
that khabar al-wāḥid was an authority from which religious knowledge could be 
derived if it was verified by an unbroken isnād of trustworthy transmitters that went 
back to the Prophet, the Muʿtazilīs rejected the authority of khabar al-wāḥid and 
instead ranked reason (ʿaql) as a source for knowledge and interpreting the Qur’an 
and hadith. For an overview of early and classical views and thoughts on hadith, see 
El-Omari, ‘Accommodation and Resistance’; Melchert, ‘The Theory and Practice of 
Hadith Criticism’.
 4 Amālī (sg. imlāʾ, ‘dictations’), usually followed by the name of the person whose  
dictations to his disciples and students in various occasions and sessions were gathered, 
hence also called majālis (sg. majlis, ‘sessions’), is a widespread title in Arabic literature 
in a variety of fields, including hadith. See Kohlberg, ‘Introduction’, 168.
 5 The book contains interpretations of more than 140 Qur’anic verses, 34 hadiths,  
31 proverbs, approximately 1,350 lines of poetry and biographical information on  
65 individuals.
 6 I do not examine the traditions that al-Murtaḍā cited as evidence or proof for his argu-
mentations in other sections of his Amālī.

 52 
ALI AGHAEI
Al-Sharīf al-Murtaḍā’s Life7
Abū al-Qāsim ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn al-Mūsawī, commonly known as al-Sharīf 
(al-Sayyid) al-Murtaḍā ʿAlam al-Hudā (355–436/965–1044), was born 
in Baghdad to a prominent family of high religious, social and political 
standing. His father, Abū Aḥmad al-Ḥusayn b. Mūsā (d. 400/1009), was 
a descendant of Mūsā b. Jaʿfar al-Kāẓim (d. 183/799), the seventh Imam 
of the Twelver Shīʿīs; he was appointed syndic of the ʿAlid nobility (naqīb 
al-ʿAlawiyyīn) several times. His mother, Fāṭima bt. al-Ḥusayn (d. 385/995), 
was the granddaughter of the Zaydī Imam Abū Muḥammad al-Ḥasan b. ʿAlī 
al-Uṭrūsh (d. 304/917), a descendant of the fourth Imam, ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn 
Zayn al-ʿĀbidīn (d. 95/712), and ruler of Ṭabaristān under the title al-Nāṣir 
al-Kabīr (r. 300–4/913–17). 
Al-Murtaḍā’s younger brother Muḥammad, known as al-Sharīf al-Raḍī 
(d. 406/1015), was widely recognised for his literary skills and known as 
the compiler of Nahj al-balāgha, the famous anthology of sermons, letters 
and aphorisms attributed to ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib (d. 40/661). Al-Raḍī was more 
inclined to politics, and after their father’s death, he took on most of his 
titles and responsibilities in the social and political domain. In contrast, 
his brother, al-Murtaḍā, was more interested in scholarship and mainly 
known for his accomplishments as a jurist and theologian. He was also a 
skilled poet, literary critic and Qur’an commentator. After the premature 
death of his brother in 406/1015, however, al-Murtaḍā assumed all the reli-
gious, administrative and political duties his father and brother had held. 
He was appointed chief syndic of Ṭālibids (naqīb al-nuqabāʾ), leader of 
the pilgrimage (amīr al-ḥajj), and supervisor of the grievance council (walī 
al-maẓālim). When his teacher Muḥammad b. Muḥammad b. Nuʿmān, 
known as al-Shaykh al-Mufīd, died in 413/1022, al-Murtaḍā became the 
leading Imāmī jurist in Baghdad.
Al-Sharīf al-Murtaḍā studied language and rhetoric with the well-
known poet ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz b. ʿUmar Ibn Nubāta al-Saʿdī (d. 405/1014), 
poetry and adab with Abū ʿUbaydallāh Muḥammad b. ʿImrān al-Marzubānī  
(d. 384/994), grammar with the grammarian and Muʿtazilī theologian Abū 
al-Ḥasan ʿAlī b. ʿĪsā al-Rummānī (d. 384/994), and hadith with Ḥusayn  
b. ʿAlī b. Bābūyah (Ibn Bābawayh), the brother of al-Ṣadūq (d. 381/991–92); 
he also studied theology (kalām), law (fiqh) and legal theory (uṣūl al-fiqh) 
 7 For his biographical information, I consulted the following secondary sources: Ahmad 
Muhammad al-Matouq, ‘Al-Sharīf Al-Murtaḍā’s Contribution’, 100–128; Madelung, 
‘ʿAlam-al-Hodā’; Stewart, Islamic Legal Orthodoxy; Stewart, ‘al-Sharīf al-Murtaḍā  
(d. 436/1044)’; Abdulsater, ‘The Climax of Speculative Theology’, 11–60; Abdulsater, 
Shiʿi Doctrine, 16–51. For a comprehensive list of primary sources on al-Murtaḍā’s biog-
raphy, see Madelung, ‘ʿAlam-al-Hodā’, bibliography; Stewart, ‘al-Sharīf al-Murtaḍā’, 
169 n.12; Abdulsater, ‘The Climax of Speculative Theology’, 15 n.37.

 with al-Shaykh al-Mufīd. It is unclear whether he studied with the lead-
ing scholar of the Muʿtazila at the time, al-Qāḍī ʿAbd al-Jabbār b. Aḥmad 
al-Hamadhānī (d. 415/1024); if he did, it would have been for a short period, 
because al-Hamadhānī moved from Baghdad to Rayy around 380/990–991.
The Imāmī Shīʿa widely recognised al-Murtaḍā as their most authorita-
tive scholar of the time. This fact is reflected by the numerous legal and 
theological questions submitted to him from Imāmī communities from 
many distant cities and regions in Iran, Syria and beyond. His enormous 
wealth also enabled him to allocate considerable resources to his studies 
and teachings. At the Dār al-ʿIlm,8 an institution dedicated to studying 
and teaching that he administered and probably located at his house, he 
received his students and other scholars, convened assemblies for schol-
arly discussions (majālis) and held debates (munāẓarāt). In addition to 
giving his students access to his extensive library, he distributed quite 
generous stipends and provided them with paper. Most of the prominent 
Imāmī scholars of the next generation were among his students; for exam-
ple, Abū al-Ṣalāḥ al-Taqī b. Najm al-Ḥalabī (d. 447/1055), Abū al-Fatḥ 
Muḥammad b. ʿAlī al-Karājakī (d. 449/1057), Abū al-ʿAbbās Aḥmad b. 
ʿAlī al-Najāshī (d. 450/1058), Abū Jaʿfar Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan al-Ṭūsī 
(Shaykh al-ṭāʾifa, d. 460/1067), Abū Yaʿlā Ḥamza b. ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz Sallār 
al-Daylamī (d. 463/1071), and Abū al-Qāsim ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz b. Niḥrīr Ibn 
al-Barrāj (d. 481/1088). Al-Murtaḍā was known for his broad-mindedness 
as well. His close friends included intellectuals of varying denominational 
and religious affiliations, including the famous Sabian litterateur, Abū 
Isḥāq al-Ṣābī (d. 384/994).
Along with his teacher al-Shaykh al-Mufīd and his student and col-
league al-Shaykh al-Ṭūsī, al-Sharīf al-Murtaḍā was one of the great 
Imāmī jurists of Būyid Baghdad; he established the doctrinal, liter-
ary and institutional basis of the Shīʿī legal school in the late fourth/
tenth and early fifth/eleventh centuries. He is one of the forerunners 
of ijtihād in Shīʿī jurisprudence and one of the founders of its legal 
theory. With al-Murtaḍā, the rationalist trend of the Imāmī school of 
Baghdad reached its peak. His teacher al-Shaykh al-Mufīd maintained 
that reason is unable to reach any religious knowledge without the aid 
of revelation. In contrast, al-Murtaḍā affirmed that the fundamental 
truths of religion must be established by reason alone, in agreement 
with the Muʿtazilī thesis. In theology, he adopted the doctrine of the 
Basran Muʿtazilīs, a position that was prevalent in Baghdad in his time,  
with some modifications concerning Twelver Shīʿī positions on the 
 8 Lit., ‘house of knowledge’. The institution was a library founded by the Būyid vizier Abū 
Naṣr Sābūr b. Ardashīr in 381/991 or 383/993. After Sābūr’s death, al-Murtaḍā took 
over its administration; see Sourdel, ‘Dār al-ʿIlm’.
 
THE HERMENEUTICS OF AL-SHARĪF AL-MURTAḍĀ 
53

 imamate, the infallibility of prophets, al-manzila bayn al-manzilatayn9 
and God’s will. Al-Murtaḍā’s anti-traditionalist tendency is well known. 
Most notable here is his total rejection of akhbār al-āḥād. Again, he 
went beyond his teacher al-Mufīd, who accepted the validity of akhbār 
al-āḥād when there was additional evidence for their truthfulness.10 I 
discuss this issue in more detail below. 
Rejection of the Authority of Akhbār Al-Āḥād
Prior to the Būyid period, the dominant trend among the Imāmīs was 
to look to traditions narrated by the Imams, often akhbār al-āḥād, as 
the basis for theology as well as law, because an infallible Imam was 
recognised as the only possible source of certain religious knowledge. 
This ‘traditionalist attitude’ is best represented by traditionists (aṣḥāb 
al-ḥadīth) in Rayy and Qum, such as Aḥmad b. Muḥammad b. Khālid 
al-Barqī (d. 274/887), Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan al-Ṣaffār al-Qummī (d. 290/ 
903) and Abū Jaʿfar Muḥammad b. Yaʿqūb al-Kulaynī (d. 329/941). 
Muḥammad b. ʿAlī b. Bābūyah al-Ṣadūq, the leading scholar of the Būyid 
period, endorsed the use of khabar al-wāḥid as a valid basis for both 
law and theology. In the works of al-Shaykh al-Mufīd we find growing 
dissatisfaction with the traditionalist school. This dissatisfaction was 
mostly related to the development of a Shīʿī doctrine in line with the 
standards of certainty set by the Muʿtazilīs of the time.11 For al-Mufīd, 
isolated traditions provide only ‘presumption’ (ẓann) and not ‘certainty’ 
(yaqīn). They had to be excluded as sources of law, not to speak of 
theology. Therefore, al-Mufīd rejected many of the traditions that Ibn 
Bābūyah collected in his books on the grounds that they were isolated 
traditions. However, al-Mufīd accepted isolated traditions when they 
were supported by additional proof (dalīl), such as a rational argument 
(ḥujja min ʿaql), evidence from customary usage (shāhid min ʿurf) or 
consensus without dissent (ijmāʿ bi-ghayr khulf).12
In his discussion of legal hermeneutics, al-Murtaḍā followed his teacher 
in what we can label ‘the certainty school’. Certainty was of crucial impor-
tance to al-Murtaḍā, not only in theological issues13 but also in legal argu-
ments. In his doctrine on legal theory, al-Murtaḍā’s ‘materialist approach’ 
 9 A theological term used by the Muʿtazila for designating the salvation status of the mor-
tal sinner (fāsiq); see van Ess, ‘al-Manzila Bayn al-Manzilatayn’. 
10 McDermott, The Theology, 298–299.
11 See Madelung, ‘Imāmism and Muʿtazilite Theology’, 13–29.
12 McDermott, The Theology, 298–299.
13 See al-Murtaḍā, al-Dhakhīra, 341. In his view, the issue of whether traditions provide 
certainty is of primary importance because discussions of the imamate and prophet-
hood are dependent on traditions.
54 
ALI AGHAEI

 is evident.14 In his reply to the legal questions he received in 420/1029, 
al-Murtaḍā provided a clarification of the way that leads to knowledge for 
all rules of law.
Know that for the rules of law one must have a source that leads to 
knowledge (ʿilm), for as long as we do not have knowledge of the 
rule and are not certain that it is beneficial (maṣlaḥa), we must allow 
for its being harmful (mafsada). And it is wrong (yaqbuḥu) for us to 
proceed to act based on it, because to proceed to act based on some-
thing that may be harmful is like proceeding to act based on what we 
know is harmful.15
To realise this aim, al-Murtaḍā needed criteria for judging source materials 
that would enable him to have certain knowledge and not mere presump-
tion. Thus, for endorsing or rejecting the authority of a khabar, al-Murtaḍā’s 
fundamental criterion is whether it provides certainty. Therefore, he clas-
sifies akhbār into three categories; namely, those akhbār whose truthful-
ness is known (maʿlūm al-ṣidq), those whose falsehood is known (maʿlūm 
al-kidhb) and those whose truthfulness or falsehood is not known (ghayr 
maʿlūm al-ṣidq aw al-kidhb).16 He puts al-khabar al-mutawātir in the first 
category, because its authenticity is certain, and thus it provides certainty. 
By contrast, he places khabar al-wāḥid, whose truthfulness or falsehood, 
and thus its authenticity, cannot be endorsed, in the third category.17 That 
is, khabar al-wāḥid provides no certainty, and at best, if the report is nar-
rated by a trustworthy (thiqa) transmitter, it gives rise only to the presump-
tion that it is true, while we must still doubt its authenticity.18 As a result, 
al-Murtaḍā does not accept the authority of khabar al-wāḥid, even if ‘its 
narrator be one of the most trustworthy’.19 The critical point in his argu-
ment for the rejection of khabar al-wāḥid is the possibility of its falsehood, 
which prevents it from meeting the criterion of certainty. 
In sum, action must be based on knowledge, and since khabar al-wāḥid 
is not a source of knowledge, it cannot serve as a basis for action. There-
fore al-Murtaḍā, in his various works, frequently states: ‘khabar al-wāḥid 
imposes neither knowledge nor action.’ Thus, ‘action on the basis of 
14 I follow the terminology used by Zysow in his The Economy of Certainty, 3: ‘For the 
materialist jurist, probability has no place in the formulation of the rules of law. Every 
rule of law must be certain in order to be valid.’ This contrasts with what he labels the 
‘formalist approach’.
15 Al-Murtaḍā, ‘Jawābāt al-masāʾil al-mawṣiliyyāt al-thālitha’, in Rasāʾil, 1:203.
16 Al-Murtaḍā, al-Dharīʿa, 2:6–8.
17 Al-Murtaḍā, al-Dharīʿa, 2:39.
18 Al-Murtaḍā, al-Dharīʿa, 2:41.
19 Al-Murtaḍā, Rasāʾil, 3:270.
 
THE HERMENEUTICS OF AL-SHARĪF AL-MURTAḍĀ 
55

 khabar al-wāḥid is not accepted’ and ‘khabar al-wāḥid has no authority 
(ḥujja) in law’.20
Al-Murtaḍā not only rejects the authority of khabar al-wāḥid, but he 
also explicitly states, ‘According to the Imāmī scholars, acting on the basis 
of akhbār al-āḥād is not accepted in law’,21 that is, basing legal behaviour 
on isolated traditions is not permissible. His rejection of acting based on 
khabar al-wāḥid is as apparent as his rejection of acting based on qiyās 
(analogy).22 He also claims that there is a consensus (ijmāʿ) among Imāmī 
scholars on this issue.23 Thus he regards the rejection of acting based on 
qiyās and khabar al-wāḥid as distinguishing features of Imāmī legal herme-
neutics. In his treatise titled Ibṭāl al-ʿamal bi-akhbār al-āḥād, al-Murtaḍā 
unequivocally states,
The certain knowledge is acquired by every opponent or adherent 
of the Imāmīs that in law they do not act on the basis of any report 
that does not impose knowledge, and that this has become a slogan 
which they are known by, just as the rejection of analogy is their  
slogan, and everyone who is in contact with them knows this.24
Considering al-Murtaḍā’s rejection of the authority of isolated tradi-
tions, the following question arises: If the Imāmī scholars unanimously 
agree to reject the authority of khabar al-wāḥid,25 why are so many akhbār 
20 See al-Murtaḍā, Rasāʾil, 1:117, 126, 235, 261, 302, 403, 417; 2:13, 30–31, 47, 60, 123, 
129–130, 351; 3:125; al-Murtaḍā, al-Intiṣār, 111, 117, 120, 138, 149, 182, 217, 235, 269, 
303, 305, 311, 344, 346, 376, 391, 408, 414, 422, 424, 427, 432, 435, 464, 483, 500, 529, 554.
21 Al-Murtaḍā, Rasāʾil, 1:24–25; see also 1:203.
22 It is known that the Shīʿī Imams issued strong warnings against the use of analogy, but 
al-Murtaḍā’s argument against analogy is formulated to pursue his demand for certainty: 
‘We reject analogy . . . as a source of legal rules because analogy provides probability  
not certainty’; al-Murtaḍā, Rasāʾil, 1:203.
23 See al-Murtaḍā, Rasāʾil, 1:7, 24–27, 206, 211; 3:309. 
24 Al-Murtaḍā, Rasāʾil, 3:309.
25 Surprisingly, his student and colleague, al-Shaykh al-Ṭūsī claims the opposite, namely 
a consensus among Imāmī scholars on acting upon akhbār al-āḥād in legal issues 
when they are transmitted in Imāmī books and collections; see al-Ṭūsī, al-ʿUdda, 
1:126–129. Needless to say, these two opposing consensus claims in almost the same 
generation of scholars indicates that there was a substantial difference between their 
doctrines of Shīʿī legal theory, that is, ‘the materialist approach’ of al-Murtaḍā vs. 
al-Ṭūsī’s ‘formalist approach’. See Zysow, The Economy of Certainty, 283–284. For a 
comprehensive discussion on this issue, see Ḥubballāh, Naẓariyyat al-sunna, 130–
152. Note that al-Ṭūsī’s doctrine was not immediately adopted by Imāmī scholars 
and a line of prominent Shīʿī jurists including al-Qāḍī ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz b. al-Barrāj  
(d. 481/1088), Abū ʿAlī al-Faḍl b. al-Ḥasan al-Ṭabrisī (d. c. 548–552/1153–1158),  
Ḥamza b. ʿAlī b. Zuhra (d. 585/1189), and Muḥammad b. Idrīs al-Ḥillī (d. 598/1202) 
followed al-Murtaḍā’s position regarding akhbār al-āḥād. Al-Murtaḍā radical rejection 
56 
ALI AGHAEI

 al-āḥād in Imāmī sources, and why are they frequently cited in legal and 
theological discussions? Is it not because some Shīʿī scholars accept and act 
based on khabar al-wāḥid?
This question often appears in al-Murtaḍā’s treatises (rasāʾil), and he 
approaches it from several perspectives. First, he disregards the claim 
that Shīʿī scholars supposedly act based on khabar al-wāḥid. In his argu-
ment, he distinguishes between two groups: (1) those scholars on whom 
one can rely because they comprehend what they transmit and what they 
leave aside, and (2) those who simply transmit what they have heard and 
narrate what they have received from their predecessors. According to 
al-Murtaḍā, the first group, whom he refers to as mutakallimūn (scholars 
of kalām, theologians),26 never act based on akhbār al-āḥād. Only the sec-
ond group, whom he calls aṣḥāb al-ḥadīth (traditionists),27 would argue 
based on an uncertain hadith for a legal rule. He states: ‘These people 
[aṣḥāb al-ḥadīth] argue for the principles of religion (uṣūl al-dīn) – such 
as the uniqueness of God, justice, prophethood and imamate – on the 
basis of akhbār al-āḥād, while it is known to every sane person that they 
[akhbār al-āḥād] do not provide any proof for that.’28 In his view, tradi-
tionists’ books and collections do not provide proof for legal arguments 
and therefore should be set aside.29
Nevertheless, al-Murtaḍā acknowledges that in their discussions with 
non-Imāmī Muslims, Imāmī scholars may refer, particularly, to akhbār 
al-āḥād of non-Imāmīs (not akhbār al-āḥād in general), but this is done 
merely for rhetorical and polemical purposes; they do not cite them in these 
cases as legal proofs.30 Nevertheless, according to al-Murtaḍā, one can act 
based on some akhbār al-āḥād when Imāmī scholars unanimously agree 
on their truthfulness because they find evidence attesting to their authen-
ticity.31 Interestingly, al-Murtaḍā regards most of the traditions in Imāmī 
of akhbār al-āḥād was later set aside in favour of a dominant tendency among Shīʿī 
scholars to follow al-Ṭūsī, who held that the legal reports transmitted by the traditionists 
of Qum were valid, since they were covered by the consensus of the Imāmī community. 
See also Madelung, ‘ʿAlam-al-Hodā’.
26 Al-Murtaḍā, Rasāʾil, 1:23–24, 26.
27 Al-Murtaḍā, Rasāʾil, 1:26–27, 211. By aṣḥāb al-ḥadīth, al-Murtaḍā is referring to the 
traditionists of Rayy and Qum, whom he considers anthropormorphist and predesti-
narian, except for Ibn Bābūyah al-Ṣadūq (d. 381/991); see al-Murtaḍā, Rasāʾil, 3:310. 
Al-Murtaḍā does not exclude Abū Jaʿfar Muḥammad b. Yaʿqūb al-Kulaynī (d. 329/941) 
from this negative assessment; he states that al-Kulaynī’s al-Kāfī is full of forgeries; see 
al-Murtaḍā, Rasāʾil, 1:410. See also Madelung, ‘ʿAlam-al-Hodā’.
28 Al-Murtaḍā, Rasāʾil, 1:211.
29 Al-Murtaḍā, Rasāʾil, 1:26–27, 211.
30 Al-Murtaḍā, Rasāʾil, 1:27. Examples of this behaviour can be found in al-Intiṣār, where 
time and again he refers to Sunnī traditions as support for an Imāmī rule.
31 Al-Murtaḍā, Rasāʾil, 1:19.
 
THE HERMENEUTICS OF AL-SHARĪF AL-MURTAḍĀ 
57

 sources as mutawātir, even though they are transmitted through a limited 
number of transmitters and are usually considered akhbār al-āḥād. Again, 
his evidence for this claim is that Imāmī scholars unanimously agree on 
their truthfulness.32 In other words, according to al-Murtaḍā, most Imāmī 
hadiths provide certainty, either because of their tawātur status or because 
of strong evidence indicating their authenticity, namely Imāmī scholars’ 
consensus, which renders them equivalent to mutawātir reports.33
In brief, we can conclude that al-Murtaḍā takes for granted Shīʿī schol-
ars’ rejection of acting based on khabar al-wāḥid. In his view, this fact 
should not be doubted merely because of the existence of akhbār al-āḥād 
in Shīʿī literature. By rejecting the authority of khabar al-wāḥid, al-Murtaḍā 
indeed puts aside one of the most significant sources of Twelver Shīʿī law 
and replaces it with the concept of the consensus of Imāmīs. As a result, 
whenever legal inference (istinbāṭ) cannot be performed by referring to the 
Qur’an or mutawātir reports, one should rely on consensus.34 With regard 
to disagreements, however, al-Murtaḍā takes reason as the ultimate stan-
dard on which arguments ought to be based.
Interpreting Akhbār Al-āḥād
Despite his categorical rejection of the authority of akhbār al-āḥād, in 
many of his works, and especially in his Amālī, al-Murtaḍā often cites  
isolated hadiths from both Shīʿī and Sunnī sources and interprets them. 
Why does he trouble himself so much with (often) figurative/non-literal 
interpretations (taʾwīl) of isolated traditions? According to al-Murtaḍā, 
As far as beliefs are concerned, one can rely on anything proofs lead 
to. Therefore, whenever the apparent meaning of a tradition runs 
counter to our beliefs, we must interpret it . . . We apply this rule 
to the Qur’an, whose authenticity is unquestionable, let alone to 
akhbār al-āḥād, about which we have no certainty . . . In case inter-
pretation (taʾwīl) of traditions fails, however, there remains no other 
option than to reject them.35
He also states, ‘Each khabar whose apparent meaning implies determin-
ism (jabr), anthropomorphism (tashbīh), or the like, and which neces-
sitates excessive exertion (takalluf) to be correctly interpreted should thus 
be rejected.’36 Despite its prima facie meaning (i.e. al-Murtaḍā’s tendency 
32 Al-Murtaḍā, Rasāʾil, 1:26.
33 Al-Murtaḍā, Rasāʾil, 1:25–26, 211.
34 Al-Murtaḍā, Rasāʾil, 1:11–20, 89, 204–205; 3:312–313.
35 Al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 2:350; see also al-Murtaḍā, Rasāʾil, 1:408–411.
36 Al-Murtaḍā, al-Dharīʿa, 2:40.
58 
ALI AGHAEI

 to reject all traditions that imply determinism, anthropomorphism and the 
like), his statement suggests that these traditions must be interpreted in such 
a way that they do not contradict Imāmī principles and doctrines unless fig-
uring out appropriate meanings for them requires exertion and arbitrariness.
However, we must not think that al-Murtaḍā resorted to figurative 
interpretations of traditions whose authenticity he did not endorse. In 
al-Shāfī fī al-imāma, he makes the statement, 
He who [figuratively] interprets (taʾwīl) a certain tradition not only 
would not regard it as inauthentic but also would not even have the 
slightest doubt about its authenticity. For, if it were otherwise, then 
he would try to show its falsehood and to prove its inauthenticity 
rather than to interpret it figuratively.37 
In another place, he explicitly states, ‘It is compulsory upon us to inter-
pret [in a meaningfully correct way] the traditions whose authenticity we 
are certain of.’38 We can conclude here that when al-Murtaḍā interprets 
reports and dedicates himself to elaborating on their various meanings, 
he has already conceded the legitimacy of these traditions and accepted 
them as authentic. This agrees with what has already been stated about 
al-Murtaḍā’s position on isolated traditions: he does not accept akhbār 
al-āḥād on their own and does not interpret traditions unless he accepts 
them as certain, because he sees them as mutawātir or as corroborated by 
strong evidence; this is basically the consensus (ijmāʿ) of Imāmīs.
A cursory look at al-Murtaḍā’s elaborations regarding the traditions that 
are discussed in his Amālī reveals that he pays little attention – if any at all –  
to chains of transmission (isnāds) and deals almost exclusively with their 
texts (matns). He does not usually mention the isnāds of traditions, and 
even when he does occasionally, he rarely uses the isnād in his evaluation or 
criticism of the tradition transmitted through it.39 This manner is fully con-
sistent with his view on khabar al-wāḥid. In his view, if the tradition is iso-
lated, then it does not have any legal authority and is invalid for theological 
issues. Therefore, there is no need to investigate the isnād and its transmit-
ters. Moreover, if the tradition is mutawātir, or supported by firm evidence, 
then it is regarded as authentic, and again there is no need to investigate its 
isnād. This explains why, in his book al-Dharīʿa ilā uṣūl al-sharīʿa, he explic-
itly refuses to go further in discussing the common secondary topics related 
37 Al-Murtaḍā, al-Shāfī, 2:262–263.
38 Al-Murtaḍā, Rasāʾil, 2:125.
39 For a limited number of examples, see al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 1:304, majlis 26, 454, majlis 
34; 2:172, majlis 65. In rare cases, he mentions the weakness of the isnād. Interestingly, 
he interprets these cases as well; see, for instance, al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 2:5, majlis 49.
 
THE HERMENEUTICS OF AL-SHARĪF AL-MURTAḍĀ 
59

 to khabar al-wāḥid, including the endorsement or rejection of al-khabar 
al-mursal, or the criteria for preferring some traditions over others while 
dealing with contradictory traditions. This is contrary to what al-Ṭūsī does 
when he dedicates a section of his al-ʿUdda fī uṣūl al-fiqh to these issues. 
Al-Ṭūsī accepts the authority of isolated traditions whereas al-Murtaḍā  
does not. ‘Only those who endorse the authority of khabar al-wāḥid’, 
al-Murtaḍā says, ‘should busy themselves with these secondary issues’.40
What remains is to interpret the tradition so that its meaning does not 
contradict beliefs that are based on solid proofs. Here, al-Murtaḍā’s rule 
regarding the interpretation of traditions is as follows:
Any probable meaning which has evidence in the Arabic language 
and literature could be suggested. Whoever is confronted with an 
odd statement should mention all the semantic possibilities of that 
statement, because it could be that the speaker intended one of those 
possibilities. However, we cannot acquire certainty regarding his 
intended meaning; it is hidden from us.41
This shows that whereas al-Murtaḍā requires certainty in accepting a  
tradition, he opens the door to much speculation regarding its meaning. 
In defining the meaning of a tradition, therefore, al-Murtaḍā never puts 
aside any proposed semantic possibility, and he tries to classify tradi-
tions by comparing them to one another. In some instances, given the 
variety of interpretations, he does not prioritise any of them, because 
there is evidence for each of them in the Arabic lexicon and literature. 
None has priority over the others. For instance, there are two variants 
of the prophetic tradition on ‘the prohibition of earning money through 
prostitution’.42 After citing various Sunnī works in gharīb al-ḥadīth, 
including that of Abū ʿUbayd al-Qāsim b. Sallām (d. 224/838),43 Abū 
40 Al-Murtaḍā, al-Dharīʿa, 2:78–79. Compare to al-Ṭūsī, al-ʿUdda, 1:146–155.
41 Al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 1:18–19. His view resembles what is referred to in literary theory as 
‘authorial intentionalism’, according to which an author’s intentions should determine 
or constrain the proper interpretation of the literary work. Nevertheless, intentional-
ism does not necessarily countenance only one meaning for a literary work. There are 
many ways in which it can accept multiple or disjunctive interpretations. If the goal 
of interpretation is to consider the meanings a work will sustain when approached in 
the conventions of literature and language within and against which it is created, then 
many interpretations of the work will be available to the reader, for all that is required 
is compatibility. For further discussion, see Davies, Philosophical Perspectives on Art, ch. 
11: ‘Authors’ Intentions, Literary Interpretation, and Literary Value’, 166ff.
42 Nahā ʿan kasb al-zammāra/al-rammāza. Both rammāza and zammāra signify prostitu-
tion. See Lane, Arabic-English Lexicon, 1:1153 and 1250, respectively.
43 Abū ʿUbayd, Kitāb Gharīb al-ḥadīth, 3:356–358. According to Abū ʿUbayd, only one 
variant is correct, i.e. al-zammāra; he maintains that the other variant (al-rammāza) 
does not make sense here. 
60 
ALI AGHAEI

 Muḥammad ʿAbdallāh b. Muslim Ibn Qutayba (d. 276/889)44 and Abū 
Bakr Muḥammad b. al-Qāsim (Ibn) al-Anbārī (d. 328/940),45 al-Murtaḍā 
states that neither of the two variants has priority over the other, because 
there is evidence for each in the Arabic language, and each can be inter-
preted in an entirely valid way.46
He does not mind if different semantic possibilities of a given state-
ment contradict or conflict with each other, if they do not run counter 
to beliefs that are based on solid proofs. For instance, in interpreting the 
prophetic tradition, ‘If you feel no shame, then do what you want’,47 he 
mentions three semantic possibilities as the intended meaning behind 
the hadith:48 
1.  It may be an expression of appreciation of an act done for God, 
meaning that if people know what they are doing is for God’s 
sake, then they should not be concerned with what others might 
say or ascribe to them (e.g. accusing them of hypocrisy).49 
2.  It may exaggerate the refutation of a wrong act, meaning that  
if people do not feel ashamed of being insolent, they may do 
whatever they like.50 
3.  It may clarify the fact that if people are not involved in wrongdo-
ing for which they might be ashamed, then they can proceed with 
doing [that act].51
44 Ibn Qutayba, Iṣlāḥ ghalaṭ Abī ʿUbayd, 59–62. Ibn Qutayba refutes Abū ʿUbayd’s view 
about the second variant by providing supporting evidence from the literature. 
45 Al-Murtaḍā apparently quoted this from Ibn al-Anbārī’s Gharīb al-ḥadīth (which is not 
extant), though citations from his book are found in later sources. For this case, see 
al-ʿAskarī, Taṣḥīfāt al-muḥaddithīn, 1:177–178. Ibn al-Anbārī, here and in many other 
places, rejects Ibn Qutayba’s view, though in some cases his criticisms of Ibn Qutayba’s 
ideas, as noted by al-Murtaḍā, are not well-argued and relate to personal rather than 
scholarly motives; see al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 1:334–335.
46 Al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 1:454–457, majlis 34.
47 Idhā lam tastaḥyi fa-fʿal mā shiʾta. See Ibn Ḥanbal, Musnad, 4:121; 5:273, 383; 
al-Bukhārī, Ṣaḥīḥ, 4:152; for a variant of the tradition with a Shīʿī isnād, see Ibn Bābūyah 
al-Ṣadūq, ʿUyūn akhbār, 2:59.
48 Al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 1:75–76, majlis 6.
49 This interpretation is attributed to Jarīr b. ʿAbd al-Ḥamīd (d. 188/804). For Abū ʿUbayd, 
it is close to the tradition that says, ‘If Satan comes to you during your prayer and says: 
“you are practicing hypocrisy”, make your prayer longer’. See Abū ʿUbayd, Kitāb Gharīb 
al-ḥadīth, 2:328–330. 
50 Abū ʿUbayd suggests this interpretation, which considers ifʿal an indicative rather than 
an imperative verb. This means, one who is not ashamed of what he/she is doing can 
do anything, however disgusting; Abū ʿUbayd, Kitāb Gharīb al-ḥadīth, 2:330–332.  
See also Ibn Qutayba, Taʾwīl mukhtalif al-ḥadīth, 346. For a similar interpretation 
attributed to Abū al-ʿAbbās Aḥmad b. Yaḥyā Thaʿlab (d. 291/904), see al-Khaṭṭābī, 
Gharīb al-ḥadīth, 1:156.
51 See also al-Khaṭṭābī, Gharīb al-ḥadīth, 1:156.
 
THE HERMENEUTICS OF AL-SHARĪF AL-MURTAḍĀ 
61

 These three interpretations are not compatible with each other. The hadith 
cannot simultaneously describe the situations of someone doing good and 
someone (else) doing wrong, just as it cannot encourage the good deed 
while it condemns the wrong deed. However, this incompatibility does  
not constrain al-Murtaḍā from proposing three different interpretations of 
the hadith.
Hermeneutical Tools for Interpreting Traditions
By drawing on his knowledge of Arabic lexicography, grammar, and rhet-
oric and by applying Muʿtazilī-Shīʿī principles in theology, al-Murtaḍā  
created a distinctive methodology for the interpretation of the Qur’an and 
hadith.52 He often interprets hadiths as a Muʿtazilī-Shīʿī theologian, and in 
doing so, he makes use of the Qur’anic verses as a skilled exegete. Traces of 
al-Murtaḍā’s multi-dimensional character are evident in his interpretations. 
Literary criticism and rational analysis are essential tools in al-Murtaḍā’s 
hermeneutics, to such an extent that we can label his approach ‘literary-
theological’. At the time of his work, the major hadith compilations – both 
Shīʿī and Sunnī – and a variety of secondary works on hadith, such as rare 
traditions (gharīb al-ḥadīth), difficult or problematic traditions (mushkil 
al-ḥadīth), and disputed traditions (mukhtalif al-ḥadīth), had already been 
produced.53 Therefore, he had an abundant source of hadith literature at 
his disposal, and he benefited from this tremendously.
Here, by studying the traditions al-Murtaḍā used in his Amālī,54 I 
explore the hermeneutical tools he employed to understand and interpret 
traditions. He cited these traditions for specific interpretive reasons, and 
his commentaries on these traditions are intended to address one or more 
52 For an outline of the characteristics of Muʿtazilī exegesis of the Qur’an, see Goldzi-
her, Schools of Koranic Commentators, 65–95. In recent years, the Muʿtazilī tradition of 
Qur’anic exegesis has started to receive more scholarly attention. For some reflections 
on the approach, methodology and hermeneutical principles employed by Muʿtazilī 
exegetes, see Mourad, ‘Why Do We Need Tafsīr?’, particularly 121 n.1, for some recent 
studies that examine Muʿtazilī tafsīr. In my contribution to the Handbook of Qur’ānic 
Hermeneutics (ed. Georges Tamer, forthcoming), I explore the hermeneutical princi-
ples and methods of al-Sharīf al-Murtaḍā in his interpretation of the Qur’an.
53 For a general overview on the formation and development of hadith literature, see  
Robson, ‘Ḥadīth: II. Collections of Ḥadīth’, in EI2, online: http://dx.doi.org/10.1163/ 
1573-3912_islam_COM_0248 (accessed 20 February 2022); Pavlovitch, ‘Ḥadīth: 6. 
Muṣannafs, Musnads, and the Formation of the Six-Book Canon’; Blecher, ‘Ḥadīth 
Commentary’, in EI3, online: http://dx.doi.org/10.1163/1573-3912_ei3_COM_32080 
(accessed 13 April 2019).
54 Of course, he interprets traditions in other places; for other instances; see al-Murtaḍā, 
Rasāʾil, 1:113–115, 120, 350–354, 408–411 (also below), 441–443; 2:20–21, 46–47; 
3:133–134 (also below), 233–239.
62 
ALI AGHAEI

 such interpretive issues, whether (1) difficult vocabulary; (2) odd or ambig-
uous senses; (3) inconsistency or contradictions with the text of the Qur’an, 
agreed-upon hadiths, reason or his theological or legal opinions. In what 
follows, I examine each of these issues in detail, and reveal al-Murtaḍā’s 
hermeneutical approach to traditions and his methods of resolving the 
problems raised. 
Commenting on Difficult Vocabulary
The most common issue that occupies al-Murtaḍā is the difficult vocabu-
lary. Some of these are cases of odd words that are key to the traditions, 
while others appear in selections of poetry or in other evidence al-Murtaḍā 
cites in defining or interpreting a particular Qur’anic verse or tradition.55 
To interpret traditions with odd vocabulary, he usually refers to the state-
ments of Arab lexicographers and philologists and to the poetry of out-
standing Arab poets. Regarding certain traditions, however, he finds it 
sufficient to elaborate on their vocabulary rather than to interpret them.56 
In addition to mentioning various interpretive aspects of a tradition, 
al-Murtaḍā occasionally suggests a new meaning for a difficult term; in 
these cases, he refers to the Arab lexicon, but interprets it in a novel manner. 
Indeed, through such cases, al-Murtaḍā demonstrates his skills in Arabic  
literature and philology. For instance, in commenting on a tradition trans-
mitted from ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib, ‘Whoever loves us, the people of the house, 
should prepare to be wrapped in poverty’,57 he mentions two distinct inter-
pretations suggested by Abū ʿUbayd al-Qāsim b. Sallām and Ibn Qutayba 
al-Dīnawarī, respectively. According to Abū ʿUbayd, in this case, ‘poverty’ 
should be interpreted as applying to ‘the other world’ (al-ākhira); that is, 
one should provide good deeds as provision for the afterlife, because one 
will require them on the day of judgement.58 By contrast, Ibn Qutayba 
believes that poverty should be interpreted as applying to ‘this world’ 
(hādhihī al-dunyā), and one should practice patience, as mentioned in  
the tradition that compares patience in poverty to a veil that covers poverty 
in this world.59 While endorsing both statements, al-Murtaḍā presents a 
55 For a long list of difficult vocabulary taken from traditions or poetry, explained and 
clarified by al-Murtaḍā, see the index prepared by the editor of Amālī, 2:460–474: fihris 
al-lugha.
56 The editor of Amālī, however, has also labelled them taʾwīl khabar; for instance;  
see al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 1:95–98, majlis 7; 1:107–112, majlis 8; 1:219–220, majlis 15; 
1:368–370, majlis 27; 2:172–174, majlis 65; 2:285–286, majlis 79; 2:398, masʾala.
57 Man aḥabbanā ahla al-bayti fa-l-yuʿidda li-l-faqri jilbāban aw tajfāfan; see also Nahj 
al-balāgha, 4:26.
58 Abū ʿUbayd, Kitāb Gharīb al-ḥadīth, 4:358–359.
59 Ibn Qutayba, Iṣlāḥ ghalaṭ Abī ʿUbayd, 117–118.
 
THE HERMENEUTICS OF AL-SHARĪF AL-MURTAḍĀ 
63

 third meaning arising from a philological reflection; he claims this mean-
ing is new. According to al-Murtaḍā, one definition of faqr is ‘to pierce the 
nasal bones of a camel to bridle it through those holes, so that the camel 
may be controlled using this halter’. Following this definition, the intended 
meaning of the tradition is that the advocate of ahl al-bayt should harness 
his soul and lead it to obedience, distract it from the desires that its nature 
inclines to and make his soul submit to patience regarding what he hates 
and the hardship of what he is supposed to do.60
According to al-Murtaḍā, the difficulty in understanding a certain 
hadith is often due to its vocabulary. Thus, a misconception or a poor 
understanding of such vocabulary can result in strange and unreliable 
interpretations of traditions. In such cases, after mentioning the various 
semantic possibilities of the odd term, al-Murtaḍā reveals the intended 
meaning of the tradition. Without fail, he takes into account the state-
ments of other experts on vocabulary in hadith – usually the works of 
Abū ʿUbayd, Ibn Qutayba and Ibn al-Anbārī – and then either supports 
and corroborates their opinions with his own ideas or criticises their 
understanding.61 For instance, in interpreting the prophetic tradition, 
laysa minnā man lam yataghanna bi-l-Qurʾān,62 he brings forward three 
interpretations that his predecessors proposed for the verbal phrase lam  
yataghanna:63 (1) lam yastaghni bi-l-Qurʾān (‘is not satisfied with the 
Qur’an’),64 (2) lam yuḥassin ṣawtahū bi-l-Qurʾān (‘does not recite the 
Qur’an with a pleasant voice’),65 or (3) lam yataladhdhadh bi-l-Qurʾān 
(‘does not enjoy reciting the Qur’an’).66 Each interpretation provides a 
possible meaning of the tradition and thus removes its ambiguity. Since 
al-Murtaḍā is convinced that all the semantic possibilities of a statement 
are plausible and that none should be ruled out, he merely seeks to pri-
oritise some of these meanings and singles out the most and least likely 
understanding, based on evidence from Arabic literature. Using philo-
logical evidence, he also offers a fourth meaning for this tradition. Just 
as ghaniya al-qawm bi-l-makān means ‘The people tarried and dwelt 
60 Al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 1:17–18, majlis 2.
61 For example, see al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 1:5–8, majlis 1; 1:17–18, majlis 2; 1:75–76, majlis 
6; 1:405–407, majlis 30.
62 Ibn Ḥanbal, Musnad, 1:172, 175, 179; al-Bukhārī, Ṣaḥīḥ, 8:209.
63 Al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 1:31–34.
64 Abū ʿUbayd, Kitāb Gharīb al-ḥadīth, 1:384–387.
65 The opinion is attributed to an anonymous authority; see al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 1:32ff., 
majlis 3. See also Abū ʿUbayd, Kitāb Gharīb al-ḥadīth, 1:386.
66 This opinion, attributed to Ibn al-Anbārī, is only found in al-Murtaḍā’s Amālī, 1:34. 
Cf. Ibn al-Anbārī, al-Zāhir, 2:7, where he says: qad taghannā idhā jahara. This indicates 
that Ibn al-Anbārī understood the tradition as lam yajhar bi-l-Qurʾān (‘does not recite 
the Qur’an aloud’).
64 
ALI AGHAEI

 long in the place’,67 lam yataghanna bi-l-Qurʾān means (4) lam yuqim  
ʿalā al-Qurʾān (‘does not take Qur’an as his dwelling [while looking for 
something else to adopt as his abode, resort, and residence]’).68
In his interpretation of hadiths, al-Murtaḍā also pays attention to rhe-
torical aspects in his exploration of their meaning. For instance, in dis-
cussing the prophetic hadith, ‘If the Qur’an were put in a hide (ihāb), fire 
would not burn it’,69 he first mentions the remarks of Ibn Qutayba and 
Ibn al-Anbārī on the hadith. Ibn Qutayba suggested three interpretations 
for this hadith: (1) the word ihāb (skin, hide) is used metaphorically for 
the body, meaning that if a Muslim learns the Qur’an, he or she will not 
burn even when they are thrown into hell; (2) the word ihāb is used in a 
literal sense, meaning that, at the time of the Prophet, when the Qur’an 
was written on parchment and thrown into fire, it did not burn, and this 
was a testament to the truth of his proclamation; and (3) the immunity 
to fire is attributed to the Qur’an itself, not to the parchment on which it 
is written. That is, fire burns parchment, but not the Qur’an itself.70 After 
rejecting these interpretations, Ibn al-Anbārī offers a fourth interpretation. 
If the parchment on which a Qur’anic verse is written falls into fire and 
burns, the Qur’an is not destroyed, because God preserves it in the hearts 
of the righteous.71 After quoting and criticising the opinions of earlier 
scholars, al-Murtaḍā stresses the rhetorical feature of the prophetic say-
ing, and voices his own opinion, that this hadith is an exaggerated pro-
nouncement to commemorate the status of the Qur’an and inform us of its 
value. According to al-Murtaḍā’s interpretation, the hadith implies that if 
the Qur’an written on a piece of parchment is thrown into fire, and given 
that fire is supposed not to burn something of high value, then fire should 
(according to the theory) not burn the Qur’an. But indeed, this is not the 
case – when the Qur’an is placed in fire it burns. In order to substantiate  
his rhetorical interpretation, he brings forth evidence from the Qur’an72 
and Arabic literature.73
67 Cf. Q. 7:92, ka-an lam yaghnaw fīhā (‘as though they had not dwelt therein’) as refer-
ring to the punishment of those who denied Shuʿayb: the earthquake seized them and 
left them motionless in their homes as if they had never been there.
68 Al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 1:34–36, majlis 3. For similar instances, see al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 
1:354–358, majlis 26; 1:492–494, majlis 37; 1:630–635, majlis 48.
69 Law kāna al-Qurʾānu fī ihābin mā massathu al-nār; Ibn Ḥanbal, Musnad, 4:151, 155.
70 Ibn Qutayba, Taʾwīl mukhtalif al-ḥadīth, 290–292.
71 See al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 1:427–428.
72 Cf. Q. 59:21: ‘Had We sent this Qur’an down on a mountain, you would have seen it 
trembling, crumbling in awe of God. These parables We cite for the people, so that they 
may reflect.’
73 Al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 1:428–429, majlis 32. For other examples, see al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 
1:6–7, majlis 1; 2:316–317, takmila.
 
THE HERMENEUTICS OF AL-SHARĪF AL-MURTAḍĀ 
65

 Removing Contradictions with the Literal Meaning of the  
Verses of the Qur’an or with Sound Traditions
Sometimes al-Murtaḍā explains traditions in which the apparent meanings 
contradict Qur’anic verses or other traditions. For instance, the prophetic 
tradition, ‘The dead person is tortured (yuʿadhdhabu) in his grave by [his 
relatives’] wailing for him’,74 seems to violate the Qur’anic principle that 
people are held responsible for their own works and not for those of oth-
ers (e.g. Q. 6:164: ‘No one bears the burdens of another’). This verse indi-
cates that the deceased are punished in the afterlife for their own works 
and offences, not for those of others. Therefore, the apparent meaning of 
the tradition must be interpreted in a way that accords with the Qur’an. 
Al-Murtaḍā offers the following interpretations:
1.  This hadith refers to people who request that their relatives wail 
for them after their death, and states that such wailing does not 
serve any purpose, rather it only causes them to be punished in 
the grave. Therefore, deceased people are punished not for the 
mourners’ wailing, but for their own request.75 
2.  It is said that this report was due to an error in transmission  
by Ibn ʿUmar, who cited this tradition in relation to his sister 
Ḥafṣa (Muḥammad’s wife) when she was crying for her father 
ʿUmar b. al-Khaṭṭāb, the second caliph. The correct version 
should be: The Prophet passed by a dead Jew and witnessed 
his family wailing for him. He addressed them, saying, ‘You are 
wailing for him while he is being punished (yuʿadhdhabu) in the 
grave for his sins.’76 
3.  Another interpretation, which is supported by some evidence in 
Arabic literature, states that ʿadhāb means ‘suffering’, not ‘punish-
ment’. When the deceased see that their beloved ones are wailing 
for them and afflicted by distress after their death, they ‘suffer’ 
in their grave. Thus, suffering in this sense does not imply being 
74 Inna al-mayyita yuʿadhdhabu fī qabrihī bi-l-niyāḥati ʿalayh. Other variants include 
inna al-mayyita la-yuʿadhdhabu bi-bukāʾi ahlihī ʿalayh, man nīḥa ʿalayhi fa-innahū 
yuʿadhdhabu bi-mā nīḥa ʿalayhi, etc. See Ibn Ḥanbal, Musnad, 1:26, 36, 42, 54; 2:38; 
6:107; al-Bukhārī, Ṣaḥīḥ, 2:80–81; Muslim, al-Jāmiʿ al-ṣaḥīḥ, 3:41–45.
75 According to al-Murtaḍā, it was a common pre-Islamic custom for people to request 
that their families wail over them after they die. He provides poetry as evidence. See 
al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 1:341.
76 A series of traditions ascribed to ʿĀʾisha, Muḥammad’s wife, contends that Ibn ʿUmar is 
neither a liar nor someone accused of lying, but the sense of hearing does err (al-samʿu 
yukhṭiʾu). According to ʿĀʾisha, the Prophet never said what Ibn ʿUmar transmitted, 
and certainly not regarding Muslims. See Mālik b. Anas, Muwaṭṭaʾ, 2:329; al-Shāfiʿī, al-
Umm, 10:216–217.
66 
ALI AGHAEI

 ‘tortured’ or ‘punished’ by God, but only experiencing ‘grief’  
and ‘sorrow’.77
Removing a Conflict with Legal Rulings
Sometimes the apparent meanings of traditions seem incompatible with 
legal rulings, and thus al-Murtaḍā tried to interpret and justify the meanings 
of these traditions in order to reconcile them with the rulings. For instance, 
the prophetic tradition (given that the hadith is correct) ‘May God damn 
the thief who steals an egg (bayḍa) or a rope (ḥabl), and thus has his hand 
cut off!’78 led the Khawārij to infer that cutting off the hand of a thief is 
not restricted by the value of the item stolen. They argued that the Qur’an 
itself confirms this generality (taʿmīm), for Q. 5:38 states, ‘As for the thief, 
whether male or female, cut off their hands’,79 and does not mention any 
restrictive condition or specification (takhṣīṣ). Moreover, some regarded 
the apparent meaning of the hadith as contradicting another tradition that 
says, ‘Cutting off the hand [of a thief] is not allowed except for a quarter 
of a dinar [or more]’,80 in which a minimum amount is specified as a con-
dition for cutting off the hand of a thief. To remove these contradictions, 
some scholars81 have stated that in this hadith, bayḍa signifies ‘a sword’ and 
not an egg, and ḥabl refers to ‘a ship’s rope’, not an ordinary, inexpensive 
rope, and both items exceed the minimum value mentioned in the tradi-
tion. In rejecting this view, Ibn Qutayba says that the one who voiced such 
an interpretation was not familiar with Arabic. He maintains that, because 
the statement contains a curse, ‘the more pejorative the interpretation, the 
more fitting it would be to the context’.82 According to Ibn Qutayba, the 
hadith was uttered after the revelation of the Qur’anic verse and was com-
patible with its literal meaning, but the Qur’anic verse is what was specified 
by the determination of the minimum value necessary for the cutting off of 
a thief’s hand.83 Al-Murtaḍā rejects Ibn Qutayba’s interpretation, and points 
77 Al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 1:340–343, majlis 25. For another example of removing discrepan-
cies between traditions, see al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 2:200–204, majlis 68.
78 Laʿana Allāhu al-sāriqa yasriqu al-bayḍata fa-tuqṭaʿu yaduhū wa-yasriqu al-ḥabla 
fa-tuqṭaʿu yaduh. See Ibn Ḥanbal, Musnad, 2:253; al-Bukhārī, Ṣaḥīḥ, 8:15, 18; Muslim, 
al-Jāmiʿ al-ṣaḥīḥ, 5:113.
79 Al-sāriqu wa-l-sāriqatu fa-qṭaʿū aydiyahumā.
80 Lā qaṭʿa illā fī rubʿi dīnār. 
81 Sulaymān b. Mihrān al-Aʿmash (d. 148/765) attributes the idea to some anonymous 
scholars; see al-Bukhārī, Ṣaḥīḥ, 8:159. But al-Murtaḍā states that Ibn Qutayba heard 
this interpretation from the Shāfiʿī jurist (faqīh) Yaḥyā b. Aktham (d. 242/857) in his 
session (majlis) in Mecca. See al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 2:6; cf. Ibn Qutayba, Taʾwīl mukhtalif 
al-ḥadīth, 246, where he did not name that faqīh.
82 Ibn Qutayba, Taʾwīl mukhtalif al-ḥadīth, 246.
83 Ibn Qutayba, Taʾwīl mukhtalif al-ḥadīth, 245.
 
THE HERMENEUTICS OF AL-SHARĪF AL-MURTAḍĀ 
67

 out a rhetorical aspect of the tradition; he clarifies that the Prophet did not 
intend to articulate a legal ruling, but rather pronounced it to humiliate  
the thief. This removes the contradiction and repudiates the misgivings of 
the Khawārij.84
Removing Antinomy with Theological Principles
Al-Murtaḍā’s primary goal in interpreting hadiths was to defend Muʿtazilī-
Shīʿī theological principles and to respond to critiques raised in this regard. 
Since many traditions are authoritative sources for the theological tenets 
of various groups, following his own theological principles, al-Murtaḍā 
first questions their understanding of these traditions, and in doing so, 
corroborates and justifies his articles of faith. Indeed, this is al-Murtaḍā’s 
dominant goal in comprehending and interpreting hadiths. Even in  
cases in which he elaborates on the vocabulary of traditions, his rational 
and theological approach is evident in his mode of argumentation.  
And even in his reaction to theological debates, he uses his literary skills 
a great deal.85
A revealing example is his interpretation of the prophetic hadith, ‘The 
hearts of humans are between two fingers (sg., iṣbaʿ) of God, and He turns 
them however He desires’.86 With regard to this hadith, the question arises 
as to how to interpret it in a way that is compatible with Muʿtazilī-Shīʿī 
theological principles and does not fall into the trap of anthropomor-
phism.87 Al-Murtaḍā mentions two possibilities to interpret this tradition. 
First, he suggests that finger (iṣbaʿ) here does not refer to a part of the 
body, rather it indicates ‘a positive effect’ (al-athar al-ḥasan), as when we 
are surprised by something, we point to it with our finger. Thus, the tra-
dition implies that the human heart is placed between two divine gifts 
(niʿmatayn), the gift of this world and that of the other world.88 The second 
interpretation is that the word iṣbaʿ refers to the possibility of penetrating  
84 Al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 2:5–9, majlis 49.
85 For example, see al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 2:50–53, majlis 53; 2:83–85, majlis 56.
86 Inna qulūba banī Ādama kullahā bayna iṣbaʿayni min aṣābiʿi al-raḥmāni yuṣarrifuhā 
kayfa yashāʾu; al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 1:318. He cites other variants of the tradition as well. 
See also Ibn Ḥanbal, Musnad, 2:168; 3:112; 4:182; 6:91, 251, 302, 315; Muslim, al-Jāmiʿ 
al-ṣaḥīḥ, 8:51; Ibn Bābūyah al-Ṣadūq, ʿIlal al-sharāʾiʿ, 2:604.
87 Al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 1:318. The same question was posed to his brother al-Sharīf al-Raḍī, 
al-Majāzāt al-nabawiyya, 346.
88 Ibn Qutayba cited this interpretation and criticised it; he questioned why, if the heart 
is placed between two divine gifts, should the Prophet pray to God to strengthen his 
heart in His religion (thabbit qalbī ʿalā dīnik)? Ibn Qutayba, Taʾwīl mukhtalif al-ḥadīth, 
302–303. Cf. also Ibn Bābūyah al-Ṣadūq, ʿIlal al-sharāʾiʿ, 2:604–604, who interprets the 
two fingers as the two ways, good and evil (ṭarīq al-khayr wa-ṭarīq al-sharr).
68 
ALI AGHAEI

 hearts; in this manner, iṣbaʿ is a kind of hyperbole (mubālagha) to describe 
divine power. To substantiate these two interpretations, al-Murtaḍā quotes 
Q. 39:6789 and provides additional evidence from Arabic literature.90
Another example is al-Murtaḍā’s interpretation of the tradition, 
The most favourable deed in the eyes of God is the one that you pursue 
with perseverance, no matter how meagre it might be. Therefore, per-
form those deeds for which you have the strength (mā tuṭīqūna), for 
God will not get exhausted (lā yamallu) until you do (ḥattā tamallū).91
To justify the last part of the tradition, which seems to attribute ‘exhaus-
tion’ to God, al-Murtaḍā suggests four possible interpretations; for each he 
provides evidence from poetry and numerous examples from Arabic litera-
ture to substantiate its different meanings. For instance, he tries to explain 
the meaning of the hadith as follows: ‘God does not cut off His bounty 
and benevolence from you until you are tired of asking Him.’ To justify 
this understanding, he refers to a rhetorical feature in the Qur’an, namely 
izdiwāj (pairing) and mushākala (resemblance), and says, ‘The human 
action is literally “weariness,” whereas the divine action is called “weari-
ness,” not in the literal sense but only on account of pairing and verbal 
resemblance, though their meanings are different.’ To support this idea, 
he provides evidence of a similar rhetorical feature in Q. 2:194, ‘Whoever 
commits aggression against you, retaliate against him in the same mea-
sure as he has committed against you’,92 and Q. 42:40, ‘The repayment of a 
bad action is one equivalent to it’.93 Al-Murtaḍā maintains that using such 
paired expressions, one with a literal meaning and the other in a figurative 
sense, is common in Arabic, particularly in reference to human acts vis- 
à-vis divine acts.94 In addition, he points to the possibility of an error on the 
part of the narrator in transmitting the tradition. In his view, the correct 
89 ‘The entire earth will be in His grip on the day of resurrection, and the heavens will be 
folded in His hand (maṭwiyyātun bi-yamīnihī).
90 Al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 1:318–321, majlis 22. See also Ibn Qutayba, Taʾwīl mukhtalif 
al-ḥadīth, 303; Ibn Fūrak al-Iṣbahānī, Kitāb Mushkil al-ḥadīth, 118–121.
91 Inna aḥabba al-aʿmāli ilā Allāhi ʿazza wa-jalla adwamuhā wa-in qalla fa-ʿalaykum 
min al-aʿmāli bi-mā tuṭiqūna fa-inna Allāha lā yamallu ḥattā tamallū. According to 
al-Murtaḍā, Abū Hurayra narrated this tradition from the Prophet. For variants of this 
tradition from ʿĀʾisha, see Ibn Ḥanbal, Musnad, 6:40, 61, 84, 122, 128, 189, 199, 212, 
233, 241, 244, 250, 268; al-Bukhārī, Ṣaḥīḥ, 2:48, 244; 7:50; Muslim, al-Jāmiʿ al-ṣaḥīḥ, 
2:188–189; 3:161.
92 Fa-man iʿtadā ʿalaykum fa-tadū ʿalayhi bi-mithli mā iʿtadā ʿalaykum. 
93 Wa-jazāʾu sayyiʾatin sayyiʾatun mithluhā; al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 1:56–57, majlis 5. 
94 Al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 1:57. For other examples of figurative interpretations, see al-Murtaḍā, 
Amālī, 1:6–7, majlis 1; 1:426–431, majlis 32.
 
THE HERMENEUTICS OF AL-SHARĪF AL-MURTAḍĀ 
69

 reading is lā yamullu (instead of lā yamallu),95 which can mean either ‘God 
does not punish you with fire unless you are tired of worshipping Him and 
refrain from obeying Him’ or ‘God does not hasten to punish you, but He 
is patient and deliberate with regard to you, until you become weary of  
His patience and hasten His torment [upon you] by committing forbidden 
acts and sins’.96 
To remove some theological misconceptions, al-Murtaḍā employs 
grammar as well as rhetoric. For instance, regarding the prophetic tradi-
tion, ‘The believer’s intention is better than his deed’,97 and in response to 
the question of how it is possible for ‘an intention to be better than a deed 
and deserve more merit’, the sixth Imam, Jaʿfar b. Muḥammad al-Ṣādiq 
(d. 148/765), replied, ‘For the deed may have been a hypocritical show for 
people, but the intention is sincerely for God’.98 Ibn Qutayba explains this 
to mean that the intention, and not the deed, is the cause of eternal bliss in 
paradise.99 Al-Murtaḍā mentions two other interpretations: (1) The believ-
er’s intention is better than a deed devoid of intention (ʿamalihī al-ʿārī min 
niyya); and (2) The believer’s intention in doing a good deed is better than 
his act of transgression (ʿamalihī alladhī huwa maʿṣiyatuhū). None of these 
interpretations satisfies al-Murtaḍā. Moreover, in all these interpretations, 
khayr is considered a ‘comparative adjective’, which, as al-Murtaḍā main-
tains, is only acceptable when two things of the same category are com-
pared. Here, however, intention and action are not of the same category; 
thus, the comparison is pointless. Therefore, he suggests that khayr is used 
here as a ‘verbal noun’ in the sense of ‘being good’. In this case, the hadith 
implies that the believer’s intention is regarded as being among his virtu-
ous deeds.100
It is no exaggeration to claim that al-Murtaḍā is brilliant in his interpre-
tation of traditions. For example, note his interpretation of the tradition 
attributed to Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq: ‘The Prophet made a “pact of brotherhood” 
 95 For the root m-l-l, he suggests the pattern malla/yamullu intead of malla/yamallu, 
which changes the meaning. As evidence, he cites al-malla with the meaning of ‘a 
bread oven’ and mentions that if one says malla al-rajulu al-khubzata yamulluhā, it 
means ‘he bakes the bread in the oven’.
 96 Al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 1:57. For other examples in which he suggests a probable error 
in the wording of the tradition, see 1:341, majlis 25; 2:201–202, majlis 68; 2:394, 
takmila. 
 97 Niyyatu al-muʾmini khayrun min ʿamalih; see al-Kulaynī, al-Kāfī, 2:84; Ibn Qutayba, 
Taʾwīl mukhtalif al-ḥadīth, 224, niyyatu al-marʾi khayrun min ʿamalihī; al-Ṭabarānī, 
al-Muʿjam al-kabīr, 6:185–186; al-Iṣbahānī, Kitāb al-Amthāl, 33–34, niyyatu al-muʾmini 
ablaghu min ʿamalihī.
 98 Ibn Bābūyah al-Ṣadūq, ʿIlal al-sharāʾiʿ, 2:524.
 99 Ibn Qutayba, Taʾwīl mukhtalif al-ḥadīth, 224–225.
100 Al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 2:316–317, takmila. See also al-Murtaḍā, Rasāʾil, 1:120; 3:233–239.
70 
ALI AGHAEI

 (muʾākhāt)101 between Salmān al-Fārisī and Abū Dharr al-Ghifārī, but if 
Abū Dharr had found out what was hidden in Salmān’s heart he would 
have killed him.’102 This hadith is clearly problematic – how is it possible 
for the Prophet to establish such a ‘pact of brotherhood’ between two per-
sons, while if one of the two had known about the secret in the other’s 
heart, he would have regarded it as permissible to murder his brother? 
Al-Murtaḍā first presents two interpretations of the phrase ‘he would kill 
him’: (1) The pronoun ‘him’ refers to what is hidden in Salmān’s heart 
(i.e. ‘it’), that is, Abū Dharr would oppose Salmān’s secret if he knew it; 
and (2) The pronoun ‘him’ refers to Abū Dharr himself, that is, knowing 
the secret in Salmān’s heart would disturb Abū Dharr in his heart and 
mind. In both interpretations, the verb ‘would have killed’ is considered 
hyperbole (mubālagha). Al-Murtaḍā, however, is not satisfied with these 
two interpretations, because both run counter to the fact that Salmān and 
Abū Dharr were sincere Companions of the Prophet and not dishonest 
or hypocritical. Thus, he suggests an interpretation of the tradition that 
accounts for their sincerity: The pronoun ‘him’ refers to Abū Dharr rather 
than Salmān, and the subject of the verb ‘to kill’ (the pronoun ‘he’, in Eng-
lish translation) is the hidden secret (i.e. ‘it’) in Salman’s heart and not Abū 
Dharr. Thus, the tradition means that if Abū Dharr were to conceive of  
the hidden content of Salmān’s heart and to realise the true extent of his 
devotion to God, his affection toward Salmān would be intensified beyond 
what he could stand, and he would be overwhelmed.103
Removing the Contradiction with Reason
For al-Murtaḍā, reason is one of the most significant tools with which to 
understand and interpret hadith. He believes that one should first examine 
hadiths against the standard of reason and then against the Qur’an and 
other sound hadiths. Only after the hadith passes these tests can one declare 
101 A ‘pact of brotherhood’ is an agreement between two Muslims, to the effect that they 
consider each other brothers. According to Muslim sources, the Prophet made pacts 
of brotherhood among his Companions (though there are disagreements regarding 
their number and names). See Watt, ‘Muʾākhāt’.
102 La-qad ākhā rasūlu Allāhi bayna Salmān wa-Abī Dharr wa-law iṭṭalaʿa Abū Dharr 
ʿalā mā fī qalbi Salmān la-qatalahū. Cf. al-Ṣaffār al-Qummī, Baṣāʾir al-darajāt 
al-kubrā, 45; al-Kulaynī, al-Kāfī, 1:401, where the context of the tradition is reli-
gious dissimulation (taqiyya). This means, even among close Companions of the 
Prophet such as Abū Dharr and Salmān, there was an overwhelming danger of  
loss of life if taqiyya was not practised. In Sunnī sources the pact of brotherhood 
was said to have been made between Salmān and Abū al-Dardāʾ; e.g. al-Bukhārī, 
Ṣaḥīḥ, 2:243.
103 Al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 2:396–397, takmila.
 
THE HERMENEUTICS OF AL-SHARĪF AL-MURTAḍĀ 
71

 it to be sound.104 Al-Murtaḍā sought to provide a reasonable interpretation 
of hadiths whose apparent meanings do not seem to be compatible with 
reason. For instance, in his interpretation of a tradition about the poem 
attributed to ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib and addressed to his Companion al-Ḥārith 
al-Hamdānī,105 which indicates the presence of the Imam at the deathbed 
of any moribund person,106 al-Murtaḍā states, ‘how can every dying person 
see him (ʿAlī), when it is not possible for a body to be present at the same 
time in different places’.107 Thus, he follows the rational approach of his 
teacher al-Mufīd108 and suggests, given that the hadith is correct, that 
the meaning is that in that moment near to death, he [the dying  
person] realises the result of his loyalty and allegiance to him [ʿAlī] 
or his deviation from him, for it has been narrated that when a per-
son approaches death and is close to death, he will be shown in that 
moment what indicates whether he is going to be among the people 
of paradise or among the people of hell.109 
When no such possible interpretation exists, al-Murtaḍā rejects the 
authenticity of the hadith altogether. For example, in a tradition that men-
tions the virtues and vices of various fowl, beasts, foods and lands, it is also 
stated that praiseworthy species worship God, love His friends and curse 
the enemies of God’s friends, while reprehensible species insult God’s 
friends. Rejection of the wilāya (guardianship) of the Shīʿī Imams is even 
cited as the reason for which eating some food is forbidden (ḥarām).110 
Al-Murtaḍā considers it irrational to attribute correct belief to some  
104 Al-Murtaḍā, Rasāʾil, 1:410.
105 Yā Ḥāri Hamdāna man yamut yaranī / min muʾminin aw munāfiqin qabalā / yaʿrifunī 
ṭarfuhū wa-aʿrifuhū / bi-naʿtihī wa-smihī wa-mā faʿalā (‘O al-Ḥārith al-Hamdānī, who-
ever dies will see me / be a believer or hypocrite before [his death] / his eyes know me 
and I know him / by his nickname, his name, and what he did’). See Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd 
al-Muʿtazilī, Sharḥ Nahj al-balāgha, 1:299.
106 For traditions referring to a similar idea, see al-Majlisī, Biḥār al-anwār, 27:157ff.
107 Al-Murtaḍā, Rasāʾil, 3:133. See also al-Murtaḍā, Rasāʾil, 1:281. Al-Mufīd states that 
there is consensus among Imāmīs on this issue. See the next note.
108 See al-Mufīd, Awāʾil al-maqālāt, 73–74. 
109 Al-Murtaḍā, Rasāʾil, 3:133. See also al-Murtaḍā, Rasāʾil, 1:280–281.
110 See al-Ṣaffār al-Qummī, Baṣāʾir al-darajāt al-kubrā, 373–374, on a toad cursing ʿAlī 
b. Abī Ṭālib; al-Kulaynī, al-Kāfī; 6:223, on a swallow grieving over what happened to 
the People of the House (ahl al-bayt); 6:225, on a skylark cursing whoever hates the 
Prophet’s family; and 6:547–548, on doves cursing the killers of al-Ḥusayn b. ʿAlī. Ibn 
Bābūyah al-Ṣadūq, Kitāb al-Khiṣāl, 493–495, provides a list of animals, including a 
monkey, pig, bat, lizard, bear, elephant, maggot, eel, rabbit, scorpion, spider, catfish, as 
well as stars like Canopus and planets such as Venus, which were originally human but 
were transformed into animals because of their various sins. For a comprehensive list 
of these traditions in early Shīʿī literature, see al-Majlisī, Biḥār al-anwār, 27:261–284.
72 
ALI AGHAEI

 beasts and wrong belief to others; and because these living beings have no 
legal responsibility (mukallaf), we cannot speak of their believing in truth 
or falsehood.111
Nevertheless, he does not entirely put aside these traditions, and he tries 
as much as possible to interpret them. For example, in a tradition in Kitāb 
al-Tawḥīd in al-Kulaynī’s al-Kāfī, Hishām b. al-Ḥakam relates to Jaʿfar 
al-Ṣādiq a trick question raised by one of the heretics (zanādiqa) to put 
God’s omnipotence into doubt: 
Is God capable of fitting the entire world into an egg without enlarg-
ing the size of the egg or diminishing the size of the world? 
The Imam responds, ‘If someone is capable of placing all that you 
see into the pupil of your eye, He [God] is also capable of performing 
this action.’112 
Although the falsehood of this tradition is evident to al-Murtaḍā, as he 
believes that there is a plethora of such wrong and irrational hadiths even 
in Imāmī collections and that one should disregard them categorically, 
he provides an interpretation of the tradition contrary to its apparent 
meaning, though he confesses that it is an arbitrary interpretation (taʾwīl 
mutaʿassif). He states, 
The zanādiqa probably did not distinguish between what is possible 
(mumkin) and what is impossible (muḥāl). Thus, the Imam was wor-
ried that if he said that this was something logically impossible, they 
would regard it as an inability on God’s part. He thus responded in 
a way which implies that if something is logically possible, then it is 
within God’s power to do that.113
Conclusion
In contrast to most later Imāmī scholars, al-Murtaḍā is one of the pioneer-
ing Shīʿī scholars who did not recognise the authority of akhbār al-āḥād 
and claimed that there was a consensus among Imāmī scholars on this 
issue. However, al-Murtaḍā’s rejection of the authority of akhbār al-āḥād 
did not mean that he disregarded them altogether. In his works, particu-
larly his Amālī, al-Murtaḍā often mentions traditions that, according to 
their isnāds, are in the category of isolated traditions. He does not reject 
111 Al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 2:349–353, takmila. For another example, see al-Murtaḍā, Amālī, 
2:392–395, takmila.
112 Al-Kulaynī, al-Kāfī, 1:79.
113 Al-Murtaḍā, Rasāʾil, 1:410–411.
 
THE HERMENEUTICS OF AL-SHARĪF AL-MURTAḍĀ 
73

 them; rather, he deliberately interprets them such that their meanings do 
not contradict his doctrinal views or legal opinions. Instead of rejecting iso-
lated traditions whose apparent meanings seem to be contrary to Muʿtazilī 
principles, al-Murtaḍā interprets them against their obvious meanings. By 
doing so, he admits the authenticity and legitimacy of such isolated tradi-
tions, so that they are considered among the true sayings of the Prophet 
or the Imams. He only rules out those traditions whose literal meanings 
support ideas like determinism, anthropomorphism and the like, or that 
contradict reason, for which there is no way to remove the contradiction 
without indulging in extreme hermeneutical choices that lead to arbitrary 
interpretations.
Al-Murtaḍā’s approach to understanding traditions is based on the 
text proper rather than the isnād. In his view, a tradition is only consid-
ered authentic when it is mutawātir or the consensus of Imāmī schol-
ars supports it. In other words, an isolated tradition is not acceptable 
if it is not supported by firm evidence, and the chain of transmitters is 
not regarded as firm evidence. Thus, there is no need to investigate its 
isnād and transmitters to determine its authenticity. When al-Murtaḍā 
interprets a tradition, he assumes that it is authentic; this may explain 
why he tries to remove any apparent contradiction between it and the 
Qur’an, the agreed-upon hadith, his theological principles or reason. 
In interpreting traditions, he applies a hermeneutical principle that any 
possible meaning may be suggested, provided there is evidence for it 
in Arabic literature. All semantic aspects of a statement should be con-
sidered, because the speaker may have intended any of those aspects, 
and we cannot be certain which one represents the original intention. 
Therefore, al-Murtaḍā mentions all the possible meanings of a given 
statement, even contradictory or conflicting meanings. In addition, he 
does not regard any of the various meanings of a tradition as incorrect, 
unless they contradict established knowledge and firm belief. At most 
he assesses and grades them relatively, considering some interpretations 
more likely than others.
For most traditions, al-Murtaḍā elaborates on their difficult vocabulary, 
thereby demonstrating his mastery of the Arabic language and literature. 
By referring to the Arabic lexicon, he sometimes suggests new meanings for 
obscure or rare words, and this leads to novel interpretations of the tradi-
tions. By mentioning various aspects of a tradition, he occasionally removes 
semantic ambiguities from it, to interpret its apparent contradiction with 
Qur’anic verses and other traditions. For al-Murtaḍā, reason and theo-
logical principles are essential criteria for understanding and interpreting  
hadiths. Indeed, this is the dominant approach of al-Murtaḍā’s interpreta-
tions, and even when he defines words and presents the meanings of the 
traditions, the prominent role of his rational-theological presuppositions is 
evident in his argumentation.
74 
ALI AGHAEI

 Bibliography
Primary Sources
Abū ʿUbayd al-Qāsim b. Sallām. Kitāb Gharīb al-ḥadīth. Edited by Ḥusayn 
Muḥammad Muḥammad Sharaf. 6 vols. Cairo: al-Hayʾa al-ʿĀmma li-Shuʾūn 
al-Maṭābiʿ al-Amīriyya, 1404/1984. 
al-ʿAskarī, Abū Aḥmad al-Ḥasan b. ʿAbdallāh. Taṣḥīfāt al-muḥaddithīn. Edited 
by Maḥmūd Aḥmad Mīra. 3 vols. Cairo: al-Maṭbaʿa al-ʿArabiyya al-Ḥadītha, 
1402/1982.
al-Bukhārī, Abū ʿAbdallāh Muḥammad b. Ismāʿīl. Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī. 9 vols. Beirut:  
Dār al-Ṭawq al-Najāh, 1422/[2001]; repr. of Bulaq: al-Maṭbaʿa al-Kubrā al- 
Amīriyya, 1311−12/1894–95.
Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd al-Muʿtazilī, ʿIzz al-Dīn Abū Ḥāmid ʿAbd al-Ḥamīd b. Hibatallāh. 
Sharḥ Nahj al-balāgha. Edited by Muḥammad Abū al-Faḍl Ibrāhīm. 20 vols. 
Cairo: Dār Iḥyāʾ al-Kutub al-ʿArabiyya, 1378/1959.
Ibn al-Anbārī, Abū Bakr Muḥammad b. al-Qāsim. al-Zāhir fī maʿānī kalimāt al-nās. 
Edited by Ḥātim Ṣāliḥ ḍāmin. 2 vols. Baghdad: Dār al-Shuʾūn al-Thaqāfiyya 
al-ʿĀmma, 1987.
Ibn Bābūyah al-Ṣadūq, Abū Jaʿfar Muḥammad b. ʿAlī. ʿIlal al-sharāʾiʿ. Edited by 
Muḥammad Ṣādiq Baḥr al-ʿUlūm. 2 vols. Najaf: Manshūrāt al-Maktaba 
al-Ḥaydariyya, 1386/1966.
Ibn Bābūyah al-Ṣadūq, Abū Jaʿfar Muḥammad b. ʿAlī. Kitāb al-Khiṣāl. Edited by 
ʿAlī Akbar al-Ghaffārī. Qum: Manshūrāt Jāmiʿat al-Mudarrisīn fī al-Ḥawza 
al-ʿIlmiyya li-l-Kutub al-Islāmiyya, 1403/1983.
Ibn Bābūyah al-Ṣadūq, Abū Jaʿfar Muḥammad b. ʿAlī. ʿUyūn akhbār al-Riḍā. Edited 
by Sayyid Mahdī al-Husaynī al-Lājawardī. 2 vols. Qum: Dār al-ʿIlm, 1377–79/
[1958–59].
Ibn Fūrak al-Iṣbahānī, Abū Bakr Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan. Kitāb Mushkil al-ḥadīth 
aw taʾwīl al-akhbār al-mutashābiha. Edited by Daniel Gimaret. Damascus: 
al-Maʿhad al-Faransī li-l-Dirāsāt al-ʿArabiyya, 2003.
Ibn Ḥanbal, Aḥmad b. Muḥammad. Musnad al-imām Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal. 6 vols. 
Cairo: al-Maṭbaʿa al-Maymaniyya, 1313/1895.
Ibn Qutayba al-Dīnawarī, Abū Muḥammad ʿAbdallāh b. Muslim. Iṣlāḥ ghalaṭ 
Abī ʿUbayd fī Gharīb al-ḥadīth. Edited by ʿAbdallāh al-Jabūrī. Beirut: Dār  
al-Gharb al-Islāmī, 1403/1983.
Ibn Qutayba al-Dīnawarī, Abū Muḥammad ʿAbdallāh b. Muslim. Taʾwīl mukhta-
lif al-ḥadīth. Edited by Muḥammad Muḥyī al-Dīn al-Aṣfar. Beirut: al-Maktab 
al-Islāmī, 1419/1999.
Mālik b. Anas. Muwaṭṭaʾ al-Imām Mālik. Edited by Muḥammad Muṣṭafā al-Aʿẓamī. 
8 vols. Abu Dhabi: Muʾassasat Zāyid b. Sulṭān Āl Nahyān, 1425/2004.
al-Iṣbahānī, Abū Muḥammad ʿAbdallāh b. Muḥammad. Kitāb al-Amthāl fī al-ḥadīth 
al-nabawī. Edited by ʿAbd al-ʿAlī ʿAbd al-Ḥamīd Ḥāmid. Bombay: al-Dār  
al-Salafiyya, 1408/1987.
al-Khaṭṭābī, Abū Sulaymān Ḥamd b. Muḥammad. Gharīb al-ḥadīth. Edited by 
ʿAbd al-Karīm Ibrāhīm al-Gharbāwī. 3 vols. Damascus: Dār al-Fikr, 1402/1982.
al-Kulaynī. al-Kāfī. Edited by ʿAlī Akbar al-Ghaffārī. 8 vols. Tehran: Dār al-Kutub 
al-Islāmiyya, 1388/1968.
 
THE HERMENEUTICS OF AL-SHARĪF AL-MURTAḍĀ 
75

 al-Majlisī, Muḥammad Bāqir. Biḥār al-anwār al-jāmiʿa li-durar akhbār al-aʾimma 
al-aṭhār. 110 vols. Beirut: Dār Iḥyāʾ al-Turāth al-ʿArabī, 1403/1983.
al-Mufīd, Muḥammad b. Muḥammad b. Nuʿmān. Awāʾil al-maqālāt. Edited by 
Ibrāhīm al-Anṣārī. Qum: al-Muʾtamar al-ʿĀlamī li-Alfiyyat al-Shaykh al-Mufīd, 
1413/1993.
al-Murtaḍā, al-Sharīf Abū al-Qāsim ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn al-Mūsawī. Amālī al-Murtaḍā: 
Ghurar al-fawāʾid wa-durar al-qalāʾid. Edited by Muḥammad Abū al-Faḍl 
Ibrāhīm. 2 vols. Cairo: Dār Iḥyāʾ al-Kutub al-ʿArabiyya, 1954.
al-Murtaḍā, al-Sharīf Abū al-Qāsim ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn al-Mūsawī. al-Dhakhīra fī 
ʿilm al-kalām. Edited by Sayyid Aḥmad Ḥusaynī. Qum: Muʾassasat al-Nashr 
al-Islāmī, 1411/1990.
al-Murtaḍā, al-Sharīf Abū al-Qāsim ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn al-Mūsawī. al-Dharīʿa ilā 
uṣūl al-sharīʿa. Edited by Abū al-Qāsim Gurji. 2 vols. Tehran: Intishārāt-i 
Dānishgāh-i Tehran, 1348 Sh./1969–70.
al-Murtaḍā, al-Sharīf Abū al-Qāsim ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn al-Mūsawī. al-Intiṣār. Qum: 
Muʾassasat al-Nashr al-Islāmī, 1415/1995.
al-Murtaḍā, al-Sharīf Abū al-Qāsim ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn al-Mūsawī. Rasāʾil al-Sharīf 
al-Murtaḍā. Edited by Sayyid Aḥmad Ḥusaynī. 4 vols. Qum: Dār al-Qurʾān 
al-Karīm, 1405–10/1985–90.
al-Murtaḍā, al-Sharīf Abū al-Qāsim ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn al-Mūsawī. al-Shāfī fī 
al-imāma. Edited by ʿAbd al-Zahrāʾ al-Ḥusaynī al-Khaṭīb. 4 vols. Tehran: 
Muʾassasat al-Ṣādiq, 1407/1986.
Muslim b. al-Ḥajjāj al-Qushayrī. al-Jāmiʿ al-ṣaḥīḥ. 8 vols. [Istanbul]: al-Maṭbaʿa 
al-ʿĀmira, 1330–4/1912–16.
Nahj al-balāgha, wa-huwa majmūʿ mā ikhtārahū al-Sharīf al-Raḍī min kalām 
sayyidinā amīr al-muʾminīn ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib ʿalayhi al-salām. Edited by 
Muḥammad ʿAbduh. Beirut: Dār al-Maʿrifa, n.d.
al-Raḍī, al-Sharīf Abū al-Ḥasan Muḥammad b. Ḥusayn al-Mūsawī. al-Majāzāt al-
nabawiyya. Edited by Ṭāhā Muḥammad al-Zaynī. Cairo: Muʾassasat al-Ḥalabī, 
1387/1967.
al-Ṣaffār al-Qummī, Abū Jaʿfar Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan. Baṣāʾir al-darajāt al-kubrā 
fī faḍāʾil āl Muḥammad. Edited by Mīrzā Muḥsin Kuchehbāghī. Tehran: 
Manshūrāt al-Aʿlamī, 1404/1984. 
al-Shāfiʿī, Muḥammad b. Idrīs. al-Umm – al-juzʾ al-ʿāshir: [vol. 10] ikhtilāf 
al-ḥadīth. Edited by Rafʿat Fawzī ʿAbd al-Muṭṭalib. 11 vols. Mansoura: Dār 
al-Wafāʾ, 1422/2001.
al-Ṭabarānī, Abū al-Qāsim Sulaymān b. Aḥmad. al-Muʿjam al-kabīr. Edited by 
Ḥamdī b. ʿAbd al-Majīd al-Salafī. 20 vols. Cairo: al-Maktabat Ibn Taymiyya 
[1397/1977].
al-Ṭūsī, Abū Jaʿfar Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan. al-ʿUdda fī uṣūl al-fiqh. Edited by 
Muḥammad Riḍā Anṣārī Qummī. 2 vols. Qum: al-Muḥaqqiq, 1997.
Secondary Sources
Abdulsater, Hussein Ali. ‘The Climax of Speculative Theology in Buyid Shīʿism: The 
Contribution of al-Sharīf al-Murtaḍā.’ PhD dissertation, Yale University, 2013.
76 
ALI AGHAEI

 Abdulsater, Hussein Ali. Shiʿi Doctrine, Muʿtazili Theology: al-Sharīf al-Murtaḍā 
and Imami Discourse. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University, 2017.
Blecher, Joel. ‘Ḥadīth Commentary’, in EI3. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1163/1573–3912_ 
ei3_COM_32080>, accessed 20 February 2022.
Davies, Stephen. Philosophical Perspectives on Art. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2007.
El-Omari, Racha. ‘Accommodation and Resistance: Classical Muʿtazilites on 
Ḥadīth.’ Journal of Near Eastern Studies 71, no. 2 (2012): 231–256.
Goldziher, Ignaz. Schools of Koranic Commentators. Edited and translated by W. 
H. Behn. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 2006.
Ḥubballāh, Ḥaydar. Naẓariyyat al-sunna fī al-fikr al-Imāmī al-Shīʿī: al-takawwun 
wa-l-ṣayrūra. Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Intishār al-ʿArabī, 2006.
Juynboll, G. H. A. ‘Khabar al-Wāḥid’, in EI2, online: <http://dx.doi.org/10.1163/ 
1573-3912_islam_SIM_4112>, accessed 19 April 2019.
Kohlberg, Etan. ‘Introduction.’ In F. Daftary and G. Miskinzoda (eds), The Study 
of Shiʿi Islam. London: I. B. Tauris Publishers in association with the Institute 
of Ismaili Studies, 2014.
Lane, Edward William. An Arabic-English Lexicon. 8 vols. London: Willams &  
Norgate, 1863ff.
McDermott, Martin J. The Theology of al-Shaikh al-Mufīd (d. 413/1022). Beirut: 
Dār al-Mashriq, 1978.
Madelung, Wilferd. ‘ʿAlam-al-Hodā’, in EIr, I/8: 791–795; online: http:// 
www.iranicaonline.org/articles/alam-al-hoda-abul-qasem-ali-b, accessed 17 
May 2014.
Madelung, Wilferd. ‘Imāmism and Muʿtazilite Theology.’ In Toufic Fahd (ed.), 
Le Shîʿisme Imâmite, pp. 13–29. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1970; 
reprinted in W. Madelung, Religious Schools and Sects in Medieval Islam,  
chapter 7. London: Variorum, 1985.
al-Matouq, Ahmad Muhammad. ‘Al-Sharīf al-Murtaḍā’s Contribution to the  
Theory of Plagiarism in Arabic Poetry.’ PhD dissertation, University of Penn-
sylvania, 1987. 
Melchert, Christopher. ‘The Theory and Practice of Hadith Criticism in the Mid-
Ninth Century.’ In Petra M. Sijpesteijn and Camilla Adang (eds), Islam at 250: 
Studies in Memory of G. H. A. Juynboll, pp. 74–102 Leiden: Brill, 2020.
Mourad, Suleiman A. ‘Why Do We Need Tafsīr? The Mu‘tazila Perspective.’ 
Mélanges de l’Université Saint-Joseph LXVI (2015–16): 121–133.
Pavlovitch, Pavel. ‘Ḥadīth: 7.1.1. Mutawātir/khabar al-wāḥid’, in EI3. <http://
dx.doi.org/10.1163/1573–3912_ei3_COM_30163>, accessed 19 April 2019.
Robson, J. ‘Ḥadīth: II. Collections of Ḥadīth’, in EI2. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1163/ 
1573–3912_islam_COM_0248>, accessed 13 April 2019.
Sourdel, D. ‘Dār al-ʿIlm’, in EI2. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1163/1573–3912_islam_
SIM_1702>, accessed 19 April 2019.
Stewart, Devin J. Islamic Legal Orthodoxy: Twelver Shiite Responses to the Sunni 
Legal System. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1998.
Stewart, Devin J. ‘al-Sharīf al-Murtaḍā (d. 436/1044).’ In Oussama Arabi, David S. 
Powers, and Susan A. Spectorsky (eds), Islamic Legal Thought: A Compendium 
 
THE HERMENEUTICS OF AL-SHARĪF AL-MURTAḍĀ 
77

 of Muslim Jurists, pp. 167–210. Studies in Islamic Law and Society 36. Leiden: 
Brill, 2013.
van Ess, Josef. ‘al-Manzila Bayn al-Manzilatayn’, in EI2. <http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1163/1573-3912_islam_SIM_4949>, accessed 13 April 2019.
Watt, W. Montgomery. ‘Muʾākhāt’, in EI2. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1163/1573-3912_ 
islam_SIM_5267>, accessed 13 June 2021.
Zysow, Aron. The Economy of Certainty: An Introduction to the Typology of Islamic 
Legal Theory. Atlanta: Lockwood Press, 2013.
78 
ALI AGHAEI

 CHAPTER 3
‘Blessed are the Strangers (ghurabāʾ)’:  
An Apocalyptic Hadith on the Virtues  
of Loneliness, Sadness and Exile
Youshaa Patel
The end returns to the beginning.
Mullā ʿAlī al-Qārī (d. 1014/1605)1
By definition, we know little about strangers – their identity, character 
or where they come from.2 Enveloped in a thick fog of mystery, strangers 
(ghurabāʾ, sing. gharīb), are often characterised as lonely, marginal figures 
who are perceived as alien, foreign, other – outcasts who stand apart from 
the mainstream. A sympathetic and moving portrayal of the stranger is 
found in the lone surviving handwritten manuscript of the literary genius, 
William Shakespeare:3
Imagine that you see the wretched strangers, 
Their babies at their backs and their poor luggage, 
Plodding to the ports and coasts for transportation.4
In this scene of the once banned play, Shakespeare gives voice to the 
historical figure of Sir Thomas More, deputy sheriff of London, who urges 
a xenophobic mob fresh from a riot against immigrants to sympathise 
with the victims of their rage by seeing themselves as ‘wretched strangers’. 
More presses the mob to imagine how they would feel if they immigrated 
 1 ‘Inna al-nihāya hiya al-rujūʿ ilā l-bidāya.’ al-Harawī, Mirqāt al-mafātīḥ, 1:378–379.
 2 Were we to know the stranger well, that person would no longer be a stranger. 
 3 Harley MS 7368, British Library. See https://www.bl.uk/collection-items/shakespeares-
handwriting-in-the-book-of-sir-thomas-more (accessed 16 January 2021). 
 4 Shakespeare, The Oxford Shakespeare, 821.

 80 
YOUSHAA PATEL
to a foreign land – poor, vulnerable, alone – and were spurned ‘like dogs’.5 
‘This is the stranger’s case’, declares More, ‘and this your mountainish 
inhumanity.’6 In restoring the stranger’s humanity, More exposes the 
mob’s inhumanity – a brilliant inversion that portrays the stranger as a 
‘borderline figure’ who ‘defines the limits of the human’.7 
Premodern Muslim intellectuals also remarked on the stranger’s  
misery and marginality. The ʿAbbāsid litterateur, Abū Ḥayyān al-Tawḥīdī  
(d. 414/1023), portrayed the stranger as a solitary figure: ‘Wherever you see 
him, you find him always without a friend. People have one another, but he 
has no one to help him.’8
Indeed, as al-Tawḥīdī points out, while most people are embedded in a 
social network of family and friends, the stranger stands alone. Weak and 
vulnerable, the stranger has no one to call on for help during difficult times. 
The stranger’s fundamental dilemma is thus one of belonging: most peo-
ple belong somewhere, but the stranger belongs nowhere. We can imagine 
how the stranger’s social isolation may effect a constant state of anxiety 
that eventually spills over into despair. ‘It is not from grief caused by the 
fear of separation that my tears flow,’ continues al-Tawḥīdī, ‘but the gharīb 
is a gharīb’.9 Here, al-Tawḥīdī suggests that there is something inherently 
dismal about being a gharīb – that is, the gharīb is a tragic figure. This 
evaluation is not merely academic, detached and impersonal, but appears 
to reflect al-Tawḥīdī’s own experiences of being a gharīb – experiences that 
etched an enduring melancholy into his disposition.
Al-Tawḥīdī nevertheless belonged to a much larger community of strang-
ers who commented on their misery. The experience of being a gharīb  
thus became part of a broader episteme in the premodern Muslim social 
 5 More’s plea to the mob for mercy is as follows:
 
 
  ‘Why, you must needs be strangers: would you be pleased 
To find a nation of such barbarous temper, 
That, breaking out in hideous violence, 
Would not afford you an abode on earth,
 
  Whet their detested knives against your throats, 
Spurn you like dogs, and like as if that God 
Owed not nor made not you, nor that the claimants 
Were not all appropriate to your comforts, 
But chartered unto them, what would you think 
To be thus used?’
 
Shakespeare, The Oxford Shakespeare, 822.
 6 Shakespeare, The Oxford Shakespeare, 822.
 7 Fiedler, The Stranger in Shakespeare, 15.
 8 Al-Tawḥīdī, al-Baṣāʾir, 8:155; trans. Rosenthal, ‘The Stranger’, 55.
 9 Al-Tawḥīdī, al-Baṣāʾir, 8:155.

  
‘BLESSED ARE THE STRANGERS’ 
81
imagination.10 In what is considered the oldest dictionary of the Arabic lan-
guage, Kitāb al-ʿAyn of al-Farāhīdī (d. c. 175/791), ghurba is defined as ‘being 
[physically] distant from one’s homeland’ (ightirāb min al-waṭan), or more 
simply, ‘exile’.11 In this way, the presence of the gharīb signals the intrusion  
of the other among us, blurring boundaries between insider and outsider, 
native and foreign. The gharīb, so commonly characterised by his disconnec-
tion, ironically becomes what Michael Pifer calls a ‘connective figure’.12 
Authored in the fourth/tenth century, the Kitāb al-Ghurabāʾ (The book 
of strangers) is a compilation of poetry and anecdotes from Arabic graffiti 
left behind by exiles across the Islamic Middle East who lamented their 
condition.13 The anonymous author of this compilation explains that 
‘writing of their sufferings on the walls and disclosing their secrets . . . has 
become the custom of strangers in every country and destination, and a 
distinguishing feature of theirs in every place and site’.14 They did so ‘in 
order to seek blessing in the prayer of (other) strangers, travellers and peo-
ple bereft of kith and kin’.15 Disconnected from their loved ones, strangers 
connected with other strangers by leaving inscriptions like this one:
I wish I knew when my hardship would be over
And my trials will come to an end
I am displaced, cast out, devoid of solace
Far away from my home and distanced from my native land.16
According to the Kitāb al-Ghurabāʾ, the misery of being a stranger is a uni-
versal human experience, found ‘in every country and destination’.17 
Reading these premodern descriptions of the stranger today, one is 
reminded of the moral panic in Europe and the United States over foreign 
refugees crossing national borders – panic that evokes an almost uniformly 
negative portrayal of strangers. According to the late Franz Rosenthal, the 
stranger, the gharīb, also carried a primarily negative valence in premod-
ern Muslim literature: ‘the positive side, the possible advantages of being a 
stranger . . . cannot match the diversity of the reflections on the stranger’s 
utter wretchedness.’18 It was just easier (and more common) for strangers 
to release emotional outpourings of grief and sadness. 
10 Pifer, ‘The Stranger’s Voice’, 30.
11 Al-Farāhīdī, Kitāb al-ʿAyn, 3:271.
12 Pifer, ‘The Stranger’s Voice’, 32.
13 Crone and Moreh, The Book of Strangers.
14 Crone and Moreh, The Book of Strangers, 21.
15 Crone and Moreh, The Book of Strangers, 21.
16 Crone and Moreh, The Book of Strangers, 63.
17 Crone and Moreh, The Book of Strangers, 21.
18 Rosenthal, ‘The Stranger’, 49.

 Nevertheless, Muslim thinkers did not exclusively portray this liminal 
state as a disability; many saw it as a virtue as well. The Mamlūk scholar, 
Ibn Taymiyya (d. 728/1328), called ghurabāʾ ‘the happiest of people’ (asʿad 
al-nās).19 There were in fact advantages to being a gharīb. But given the 
overwhelming misery of being a stranger, how did Ibn Taymiyya and other 
Muslim scholars construe it as a virtue? Answering this question is my 
main task in this chapter. In fact, I wish not only to illuminate this alterna-
tive point of view, but also to suggest that this outlook is more prevalent 
in premodern Muslim writings on the subject than previously assumed in 
Western scholarship – that in the Muslim social imaginary, being a stranger 
was not so grim.
We may credit the Prophet Muhammad for this optimism. According 
to a hadith collected by Muslim b. al-Ḥajjāj (d. 261/875), the Prophet told 
his Companions, ‘Islam began strange, and will [one day] return to being 
strange – just as it began – so blessed are the strangers (ṭūbā li-l-ghurabāʾ)’.20 
Rosenthal credits the hadith with ‘merging all the various strands of thought 
about the stranger into one overarching concept’.21 Other hadiths – and 
the substantial body of commentary on them – enrich the apocalyptic 
mythology enveloping the hadith.22 Perceiving that the end times may 
indeed be imminent, today, many followers of extremist groups such as ISIS 
and al-Qaida call themselves ghurabāʾ, or strangers, to signal their religious 
credentials and disavowal of mainstream cultural norms.23 So potent is 
this badge of non-conformity that a nashīd titled ‘Ghurabāʾ, ghurabāʾ’ has 
become a global anthem for Muslim extremists.24 And while I am tempted to 
let present concerns dictate my enquiry, nonetheless I have chosen to narrow 
my focus to the Islamic past: How did premodern religious authorities – 
Sufis, jurists, theologians and historians – understand the virtues of being  
a stranger in light of this hadith? 
19 Ibn Taymiyya, Majmūʿa, 18:292.
20 Muslim, Ṣaḥīḥ, 80 (Kitāb al-īmān, bāb bayān anna al-Islām badaʾa gharīb wa-sa-yaʿūdu 
gharīb); al-Tirmidhī, Sunan, 744 (Kitāb al-īmān, bāb mā jāʾa anna al-Islām badaʾa 
gharīb wa-sa-yaʿūdu gharīb); Ibn Mājah, Sunan, 602–603 (Kitāb al-fitan, bāb badaʾa 
al-Islām gharīb); Ibn Abī Shayba, al-Muṣannaf, 7:83; Abū Yaʿlā, Musnad, 11:52, and 
other narrations, 8:388, 2:99; al-Ṭaḥāwī, Sharḥ Mushkil al-āthār, 2:171, and other 
narrations 2:169–171; al-Quḍāʿī, Musnad, 2:138, and other narrations, 2:137–139; 
al-Bazzār, Musnad, 8:332, 12:209; al-Ṭabarānī, al-Muʿjam al-kabīr, 10:99, and another 
narration, 6:164. See nn. 35–39 below for references to other narrations of the hadith.
21 Rosenthal, ‘The Stranger’, 59.
22 I mention some of these other apocalyptic hadiths below. Also see references in notes 
33–34.
23 Al-Thaghrī, ‘And as for the Blessing’; Wood, The Way of the Strangers; McCants,  
The ISIS Apocalypse, 100–103; Fishman, ‘After Zarqawi’; Creswell and Haykel, ‘Battle 
Lines’, 102–108.
24 Husain, The House of Islam, 141–154.
82 
YOUSHAA PATEL

  
‘BLESSED ARE THE STRANGERS’ 
83
There are historical obstacles that hinder a straightforward answer to 
this question. Rosenthal lamented, ‘A knowledge of the context in which it 
[the hadith] originated and what it originally referred to would be extremely 
helpful, but, to all indications, it is not within our reach . . .’25 Although it 
may be impossible to ascribe the hadith to a single origin, we can uncover 
some information about when and where it circulated.26 It is likely that  
the strangers mentioned in this tradition do not refer to a single group, but 
to many groups – as the variants, briefly discussed below, suggest. 
In what follows, I first examine the text of the hadith – what I call the 
hadith of al-ghurabāʾ – together with its transmission history, in order to 
illuminate when and where it first circulated and how it may have been 
understood during the first centuries of Islam. I demonstrate how vari-
ants of the hadith blur conventional scholarly distinctions between ‘text’ 
and ‘commentary’ by offering explanations of the key term, ghurabāʾ, in 
the text itself. I also demonstrate that key narrations of the hadith can be 
linked to specific geographic locales. After examining the text and trans-
mission of the hadith, I trace its reception in a wide range of Islamic liter-
ary genres, including manuals of ethics and spirituality, fatwā collections, 
Sufi treatises, historical chronicles and independent treatises on ghurba, 
from the fourth/tenth century until the ninth/fifteenth century. This con-
ceptual history illuminates the meaning and value of non-conformity in 
Islamic thought.
It is important to keep in mind that the experience of being a stranger 
was not limited to elite literary or scholarly circles but was woven into 
the everyday lives of Muslims. Recently, Kristina Richardson has shown 
that an itinerant tribal group, the Banū Sāsān, who renamed themselves 
‘the ghurabāʾ’ in the seventh/thirteenth century, possessed their own dis-
tinct language: ‘the language of strangers’ (lisān al-ghurabāʾ).27 Beyond the 
archive of Arabic graffiti of poems and laments left by ghurabāʾ on stones, 
walls and gates in taverns, shrines and mosques, cosmopolitan cities like 
Damascus may even have had a ‘strangers’ quarter’ (ḥārat al-ghurabāʾ), 
inhabited by travellers, foreigner merchants and students, as well as  
refugees.28 And throughout premodern dār al-Islām – east (mashriq) and 
west (maghrib) – hostelries, called fundūqs or khāns, served as lodges for 
travellers, residents, pilgrims and merchants alike, helping to establish a 
25 Rosenthal, ‘The Stranger’, 60; ʿAlī al-Riḍā, Ṣaḥīfat al-Riḍā.
26 On dating (and locating) prophetic traditions, see Motzki, ‘Dating Muslim Traditions’; 
Motzki, ‘The Muṣannaf’; Berg, ‘Competing Paradigms’; Sadeghi, ‘The Traveling Tradi-
tion Test’; Yarbrough, ‘I’ll Not Accept Aid’. Also see my study, ‘“Whoever Imitates a 
People”’.
27 Richardson, ‘The Invisible Strangers’, 188.
28 Rosenthal, ‘The Stranger’, 63; see also al-Ghazzī, Luṭf al-samar, 1:39 n.1.

 society and culture of hospitality in which strangers could find a place, if 
only for a while.29
‘Who are the Ghurabāʾ?’
Gharīb (pl. ghurabāʾ), as Michael Pifer explains, is an Arabic term that 
‘encompassed a broad range of theological concepts, social categories, affec-
tive states and topics of literary production among medieval Jews, Chris-
tians, and Muslims alike’.30 Neither the idea nor the term was exclusive to 
Muslims. Its Semitic root, gh-r-b, meaning ‘to enter’, Rosenthal argues, is 
entwined with the original meaning of the Arabic gharīb as a newcomer 
who enters or intrudes on a group.31 Eventually, the term came to describe 
what was strange in two primary senses: (1) foreigners, travellers and out-
siders; and (2) unusual, rare or marvellous things. After the emergence 
of Islam, the semantic field of gharīb not only continued to encompass 
strangers of various types, but also evolved into a lexicographical term that 
identified rare and unusual words in Islamic scripture, the gharīb al-Qurʾān 
and gharīb al-ḥadīth.32 The robust semantic field of gharīb, in fact, encom-
passes a cluster of Arabic words derived from the root gh-r-b that enhances 
our understanding of the stranger as a relational figure who straddles the 
dialectic between inclusion and exclusion, connection and disconnection; 
these variations include ightirāb (estrangement), tagharrub (emigration), 
taghrīb (expulsion or banishment) and ghurba (exile, or the state of being 
a stranger). The term, like the physical bodies of the subjects it represents, 
was also mobile, migrating beyond the linguistic boundaries of Arabic, and 
crossing into New Persian, Anatolian Turkish and Middle Armenian, thus 
crossing geographic, cultural and religious boundaries as well.33
Muslim scholars – like Jewish and Christian sages – transmitted and 
compiled traditions that purported to reveal the secrets of God, and are, 
in other words, apocalyptic; they prophesy, often through symbol and 
allegory, what will take place at the end of the world – the last days, the 
day of judgement, heaven and hell.34 While some traditions detail future 
events that correspond to crises and catastrophes that preceded or were  
29 Constable, Housing the Stranger.
30 Pifer, ‘The Age of the Gharīb’, 15.
31 Rosenthal, ‘The Stranger’, 38.
32 See, for example, al-Iṣfahānī, Mufradāt and Ibn al-Athīr, al-Nihāya.
33 Pifer, ‘The Age of the Gharīb’, 15.
34 On Muslim apocalyptic in premodern Islam, see Madelung, ‘Apocalyptic Prophecies’; 
M. Cook, ‘Eschatology’; M. Cook, ‘An Early Apocalyptic Chronicle’; D. Cook, Studies in 
Muslim Apocalyptic; Livne-Kafri, ‘Some Notes’; Shoemaker, The Apocalypse of Empire; 
Velji, An Apocalyptic History. On Muslim apocalyptic in modern Islam, see D. Cook, 
Contemporary Muslim Apocalyptic Literature; D. Cook, ‘Ḥadīth’; and Filiu, Apocalypse.
84 
YOUSHAA PATEL

  
‘BLESSED ARE THE STRANGERS’ 
85
contemporary to the narrator, thus tantalising historians of early Islam 
with the possibility of determining their origin stories, others do not. By 
purporting to disclose a truth that has yet to come, the hadith of al-ghurabāʾ 
fits into a genre of Islamic apocalypticism. But due to the brevity and  
heterogeneity of the hadith’s textual content, it defies easy placement into a 
specific historical context.35 
The hadith of al-ghurabāʾ has been transmitted in multiple narrations, 
with variations in the text (matn) that range from minor to major. Although 
this textual heterogeneity further obscures an already enigmatic hadith, it 
is nonetheless productive; when taken together, the narrations provide an 
early semantic map of a tradition. In some narrations, the phrase ‘blessed 
are the strangers’ (ṭūbā li-l-ghurabāʾ) is absent. In other narrations, Islam 
is replaced with a related term such as dīn or īmān; and in yet others, the 
Prophet Muhammad is asked ‘Who are they (i.e. strangers)?’ and he replies 
with a variety of answers:
1. ‘Those who have left their tribes.’36
2. ‘Reformers at a time when the masses have become corrupt.’37
3.  ‘Those who love my Sunna and teach it to others.’38
4.  ‘A virtuous minority amidst a corrupt majority, who are disobeyed 
more often than obeyed,’ or ‘who are more loathed by the people 
than loved.’39
5.  ‘[They are] fugitives of faith. They will gather with Jesus, the son 
of Mary, on the day of judgement.’40
In fact, most narrations include glosses on al-ghurabāʾ, the key term on 
which the meaning of the tradition hinges. In these narrations, the source 
35 The hadith compiler, Ibn Mājah, categorises the hadith of al-ghurabāʾ under the heading 
‘The chapter on tribulations’ (kitāb al-fitan): Ibn Mājah, Sunan, 602–603. The hadith is 
also found in the earliest complete work of apocalyptic to survive; this work dates to the 
early third/ninth century: al-Marwazī, Kitāb al-Fitan, 108; translated as al-Marwazī, ‘The 
Book of Tribulations’, 93. Later, Mamlūk-era religious scholars like Ibn Kathīr (d. 774/1373) 
continued to associate the hadith with the end times: Ibn Kathīr, al-Nihāya, 1:33–34.
36 ‘Al-nuzzāʿ min al-qabāʾil.’ Ibn Mājah, Sunan, 603 (Kitāb al-fitan, bāb badaʾa al-Islām 
gharīb); al-Dārimī, Sunan, 3:1813 (Kitāb al-riqāq, bāb inna al-Islām badaʾa gharīb); Ibn 
Ḥanbal, Musnad, 6:325; Ibn Abī Shayba, al-Muṣannaf, 7:83; Abū Yaʿla, Musnad, 8:388; 
al-Ṭaḥāwī, Sharḥ Mushkil al-āthār, 2:169. 
37 ‘Alladhīna yuṣliḥūna idhā fasada al-nās’, and similar statements. Al-Tirmidhī, Sunan, 
744 (Kitāb al-īmān, bāb mā jāʾa anna al-Islām badaʾa gharīb wa-sa-yaʿūdu gharīb); 
al-Ṭabarānī, al-Muʿjam al-awsaṭ, 8:308; al-Ṭabarānī, al-Muʿjam al-kabīr, 6:164; Ibn 
Abī Shayba, al-Muṣannaf, 7:83; al-Ṭaḥāwī, Sharḥ Mushkil al-āthār, 2:170; al-Quḍāʿī, 
Musnad, 2:139.
38 Al-Quḍāʿī, Musnad, 2:138.
39 Ibn Ḥanbal, Musnad, 11:230–231.
40 Ibn Ḥanbal, Kitāb al-Zuhd, 187.

 text cannot be neatly distinguished from its commentary since the text is 
itself a commentary on al-ghurabāʾ. The presence of these glosses suggests 
that some narrators exploited the ambiguity of the term ghurabāʾ to steer 
their interpretation of the hadith toward the meaning that aligned best 
with their subjective worldview, rhetorical objectives, emotional state and 
social circumstances. 
Despite the diversity of the above glosses, these authors seem to agree 
that the ghurabāʾ are non-conformists; they are a minority who stand  
out from the crowd. But, the ghurabāʾ are also not a uniform category. 
Reflecting the heterogeneity of the texts that represent them, the ghurabāʾ 
are a diverse group. The plurality of narrations of the hadith indicate that 
there are numerous ways of being strange and different.
The strangers’ difference is unique because it is not a deplorable or 
inferior kind of difference – as is often assumed of those who cannot, or 
refuse to, fit in. Ṭūbā, translated here as ‘blessed’, is the term that bestows a  
positive valence on the ghurabāʾ. Although ṭūbā is also a multivalent term, 
its semantic field is uniformly positive, encompassing the meanings of  
happiness, eternal salvation and a special tree in heaven.41 Thus, in this 
context, the ghurabāʾ are spiritually and morally superior to the masses. 
They are an elite group whose members deserve God’s favour; they have 
a noble status that, in both theory and practice, can be claimed by anyone 
who is viewed, or who views themselves, as strangers.
Transmission Network: Narrators as Interpreters
With the hadith’s multivalence in mind, I offer a preliminary sketch of its 
transmission history. The hadith was widely circulated among Muslim 
traditionists, and is found in both early and late Sunnī collections of 
hadiths, including the Ṣaḥīḥ collection of Muslim, the Sunans of Ibn 
Mājah (d. 273/887), al-Tirmidhī (d. 279/892), and al-Dārimī (d. 255/869), 
and the Musnad of Aḥmad b. Ḥanbal (d. 241/855), among others.42 The 
Companions most commonly credited with transmitting the tradition from 
the Prophet include ʿAbdallāh b. Masʿūd (d. c. 32–33/652–654) and Abū 
Hurayra (d. 58/678), although ʿAbdallāh b. ʿUmar (d. 73/692) and Anas b. 
Mālik (d. 91/709) are occasionally mentioned as well. Muslim and other 
hadith critics ranked its authenticity as sound (ṣaḥīḥ), although they deemed 
some narrations to be weak (ḍaʿīf), or very weak (ḍaʿīf jiddan).43 
41 See the entry for ṭ-y-b in Lane and Lane-Pool, An Arabic-English Lexicon, 2: 
1900–1904.
42 See n. 20, nn. 35–39 above for references. 
43 See, for example, Nāṣir al-Dīn al-Albānī’s grade of ḍaʿīf jiddan for one narration of the 
hadith of al-ghurabāʾ in al-Tirmidhī, Sunan, ed. al-Albānī, 593.
86 
YOUSHAA PATEL

  
‘BLESSED ARE THE STRANGERS’ 
87
In my analysis, I focus on the two most widely circulated narrations. 
First, I examine what I refer to as the short narration, which does not 
include a gloss on the key term, ghurabāʾ: ‘Islam began strange, and will 
[one day] return to being strange – just as it began – so blessed are the 
strangers!’ Next, I examine the specific narration that appends the gloss 
‘Those who shun their tribes’. The full text of this narration is ‘“Islam began 
strange, and will [one day] return to being strange – just as it began – so 
blessed are the strangers!” It was asked, “Who are the strangers, O’ Mes-
senger of God?” He replied, “Those who shun their tribes (al-nuzzāʿ min 
al-qabāʾil).”’ I draw on the recent studies of Behnam Sadeghi and Najam 
Haider who have explored how it is possible to link the circulation of some 
hadiths to specific geographic locales.44
Turning first to the short narration (see the isnād map in Figure 3.1),  
I examine the figure who circulated it most widely, Marwān b. Muʿāwiya 
b. al-Fazārī (d. 193/808–809) of Kufa.45 Details from his biography and the 
presence of distinctive linguistic features from his narration reveal impor-
tant details about its circulation. Al-Fazārī was born during the reign of 
the Umayyad caliph, Hishām b. ʿAbd al-Mālik (r. 105–125/724–743), 
and died during the ʿAbbāsid period. Al-Fazārī narrated the hadith on 
the authority of the Companion, Abū Hurayra, to many students during  
the second half of the second/eighth century. According to the isnād, 
al-Fazārī’s teacher Yazīd b. Kaysān and his teacher Abū Ḥāzim al-Ashjaʿī, 
who learned the hadith from Abū Hurayra, were Kufan as well.46 Al-Fazārī 
eventually moved to Damascus – and the tradition travelled with him. All 
five students to whom he is said to have transmitted the tradition settled in 
cities outside Kufa: Ibn Abī ʿUmar al-ʿAdanī, who was Yemeni, and Yaʿqūb 
b. Ḥumayd b. Kāsib, who was Medinan, settled in Mecca; Suwayd b. Saʿīd 
of Herat settled in Anbar, Iraq; Muḥammad b. ʿAbbād, who was Meccan, 
settled in Baghdad; and ʿAbd al-Raḥmān b. Ibrāhīm (Duhaym) settled in 
Damascus. 
The connection of this short narration to Kufa is strengthened by two 
other Kufan narrations: a mursal narration (in which the Companion it was 
transmitted from is missing) collected by the renowned Iraqi traditionist, 
Abū Bakr b. Abī Shayba (d. 235/849), and another narration transmitted by 
the Kufan judge, Ḥafṣ b. Ghiyāth (d. 194/809), on the authority of the Com-
panion ʿAbdallāh b. Masʿūd, during the second half of the second/eighth 
44 Haider, ‘The Geography’; Sadeghi, ‘The Traveling Tradition Test’.
45 Al-Dhahabī, Siyar, 9:51–53.
46 Abū Ḥāzim al-Ashjaʿī (d. c. 100/718) was a companion of Abū Hurayra. See al-Dhahabī, 
Siyar, 5:7–8. For Yazīd b. Kaysān Abū Ismāʿīl al-Yashkurī al-Kūfī, see Ibn Ḥajar, Taqrīb 
al-tahdhīb, 1:604.

 Figure 3.1 Isnād map of the short narration of the ‘Blessed are the strangers’ hadith.

  
‘BLESSED ARE THE STRANGERS’ 
89
century.47 Although these two narrations are solitary transmissions, when 
combined with al-Fazārī’s widely circulated narration, they strengthen our 
confidence that the short narration was circulated in Kufa no later than the 
second half of the second/eighth century.48
The second narration we examine, the one with the gloss ‘Those who 
shun their tribes’, links this hadith to Kufa more closely. It appears that 
Ḥafṣ b. Ghiyāth was mainly responsible for circulating this version during  
the second half of the second/eighth century (see Figure 3.2).49 Like the 
narrators of the short version, the narrators preceding Ibn Ghiyāth (i.e. 
al-Aʿmash, Abū Isḥāq al-Sabīʿī, Abū al-Aḥwaṣ al-Ashjaʿī) are all Kufan. 
Unlike al-Fazārī, however, Ibn Ghiyāth primarily transmitted the hadith 
to other Kufans, who then transmitted it to compilers of hadith. We can 
confidently conclude that the gloss ‘those who shun their tribes’ is distinc-
tively Kufan.
What might explain the interest among Kufans in circulating hadiths 
that extol the ghurabāʾ? As mentioned by subsequent commentators on 
the hadith, the phrase ‘Those who shun their tribes’ immediately evokes 
memories of the first Muslim converts who left their tribes and became 
exiles, emigrating from Mecca to Abyssinia, then to Medina. The turbulent 
social and political climate of Kufa during the first/seventh and second/
eighth centuries fuelled apocalyptic imagination and may have resonated 
with the first generations of Kufans who perceived the Arab nobility 
(ashrāf) who immigrated to the city as usurpers who had seized power 
through the influence of tribal relations, not through piety and upright 
conduct. The Kufans who found themselves at the margins of political 
power loathed this reversal of fortune, which resulted in political crises 
47 A Schachtian view would likely propose that the mursal narration is chronologically 
the oldest narration. It is also worth noting that there is a minor variation in the lin-
guistic form of al-Fazārī’s narration. Unlike the other two Kufan narrations, which take 
the form of a nominal statement (inna al-Islām badaʾa gharīb . . .) in which the noun 
precedes the verb (jumla ismiyya), al-Fazārī’s narration is a verbal statement (badaʾa 
al-Islām gharīb . . .) in which the verb precedes the noun (jumla fiʿliyya). All five of his 
students transmit the narration as verbal statements as well (see references in n. 20 
to Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim and Sunan Ibn Mājah). Although Abū Yaʿlā al-Mawṣīlī transmits one 
tradition from al-Fazārī in his Musnad, in the form of a jumla ismiyya, it is via Suwayd 
b. Saʿīd, who is also mentioned as a transmitter in Ibn Mājah’s collection where it is 
transmitted as a jumla fiʿliyya. Abū Yaʿlā’s transmission does not provide a strong basis 
to reject the much stronger evidence of Muslim and Ibn Mājah that al-Fazārī transmit-
ted the narration as a jumla fiʿliyya. Although the meanings of both forms are identical  
(with slight differences in rhetorical emphasis), the wide circulation of al-Fazārī’s  
narration as a verbal statement is a distinctive feature of his narration in Kufa. 
48 To be clear, this conclusion is not meant to imply that al-Fazārī invented the tradition, 
or that he was the first to transmit this specific narration.
49 On Ḥafṣ b. Ghiyāth, see al-Dhahabī, Siyar, 9:22–34; on his relationship to the Ḥanafī 
school, see Tsafrir, The History, 1–27.

 Figure 3.2 Isnād map of the ‘Those who shun their tribes’ narration.

  
‘BLESSED ARE THE STRANGERS’ 
91
and even revolution. Coming of age during the ʿAbbāsid period, however, 
Ḥafṣ b. Ghiyāth, did not share this discontent. As a judge situated in the 
emerging Ḥanafī legal school and as a traditionist, he served as qāḍī of 
Kufa under the ʿAbbāsids until 194/809 and argued that Muslim subjects 
should not rebel against the caliph. Although some Kufans believed that 
‘accursed Baghdād will be destroyed and Kufa will be queen of the world, 
after having been a dwelling of exile and waiting for true believers’, Ibn 
Ghiyāth was likely not among them.50 In summary, although we know that 
Kufa plays a central role in Imāmī Shīʿī apocalyptic lore (as the capital of 
the messianic figure of the Mahdī),51 and a peripheral role in Sunnī apoca-
lyptic, where Iraq is the setting for a climactic battle against Byzantine 
Christians,52 it is difficult to assign a single sectarian or polemical motive 
to Kufans who transmitted this specific narration because they themselves 
were so diverse.
Imāmī Shīʿīs also transmitted the hadith of the ghurabāʾ, but less widely 
than their Sunnī counterparts. This is surprising given their self-percep-
tion as a righteous group on the margins of power. The hadith, however, 
can be found in a fourth-/tenth-century collection of apocalyptic hadiths 
about the great occultation of the twelfth imam and Mahdī (Kamāl al-dīn 
wa-tamām al-niʿma) compiled by the Persian Imāmī authority, al-Shaykh 
al-Ṣadūq Ibn Bābawayh al-Qummī (d. 381/991–992), who was born in 
Qum but also resided in Baghdad and Rayy.53 I touch upon Imāmī Shīʿī 
interpretations of the hadith below.
Reception
The textual content (mutūn) of these hadith narrations presaged subse-
quent commentaries (shurūḥ) of it. After the third-/ninth-century canoni-
cal hadith compilations, the first commentaries on the hadith of the 
ghurabāʾ emerged, including Kitāb al-Ghurabāʾ (The book of strangers),  
a treatise by the Baghdadi-Meccan Shāfiʿī scholar Abū Bakr al-Ājurrī  
(d. 360/970), in which he explains the hadith. This should not be confused 
with the Kitāb al-Ghurabāʾ mentioned above, composed anonymously 
during the same century.54 Neither that treatise nor Tārīkh al-Ghurabāʾ, a 
50 Djait, ‘al-Kūfa’, EI2. 
51 The Mahdī triumphs over the Antichrist figure of Sufyānī, a descendent of his nemesis, 
Muʿāwiya b. Abī Sufyān. See Madelung, ‘The Sufyānī’, 5–48; al-Marwazī, ‘The Book of 
Tribulations’, 196–203; D. Cook, Studies in Muslim Apocalyptic, 122–136, 319–321.
52 In the Sunnī narrative of the end times, Jerusalem, not Kufa, becomes the capital of the 
Mahdī’s reign. Al-Marwazī, ‘The Book of Tribulations’, 207–208; D. Cook, Studies in 
Muslim Apocalyptic, 172–182.
53 Al-Qummī, Kamāl al-dīn, 72, 193–194.
54 Al-Ājurrī, Kitāb al-Ghurabāʾ.

 compilation of the narratives of foreigners who immigrated to Egypt, even 
mention the hadith.55
Al-Ājurrī’s Kitāb al-Ghurabāʾ is the most significant premodern treatise 
written on the hadith, not only because it is the earliest surviving treatise 
of its kind, but also because of the literary and intellectual value of its con-
tent. Although Iḥsān ʿAbbās examined the treatise in a brief chapter com-
posed in Arabic, Rosenthal did not have access to the treatise and therefore 
did not include it in his study.56 I begin with a summary and analysis of 
al-Ājurrī’s Kitāb al-Ghurabāʾ to set the stage for my analysis of the com-
mentaries that follow. 
Having immigrated to Mecca from his native Baghdad, al-Ājurrī expe-
rienced being a gharīb first-hand. In Kitāb al-Tafarrud wa-l-ʿuzla, now 
lost, al-Ājurrī also explores the virtues of solitude and indicates his inter-
est in the subject of non-conformity.57 He enjoyed compiling traditions –  
prophetic and non-prophetic – on topics of spirituality and piety, as is 
apparent in the organisation of Kitāb al-Ghurabāʾ. Individual chapters 
begin with traditions that address the following topics: what is meant by 
the term ghurabāʾ, why it is desirable to become a gharīb, how a gharīb’s 
divine oaths attract spiritual power, why a gharīb should be loved and  
how a gharīb dies. 
Al-Ājurrī introduces the treatise with a cluster of variations on the had-
ith of the ghurabāʾ, all of which stress the minority status of the ghurabāʾ. 
He begins with a narration that identifies them as ‘reformers at a time when 
the masses have become corrupt’.58 Having introduced the reader to this 
tradition, al-Ājurrī adds his own explanation on how ‘Islam began strange’:
Before the Prophet Muḥammad was sent by God, people followed 
different religions; there were Jews, Christians, Magians, and idola-
ters. So, when the Prophet came, converts to Islam became strang-
ers in their neighbourhoods and among their people. Forced to 
disguise their faith, they were shunned by their families, disgraced 
and despised, but they nonetheless patiently endured the suffering 
until God empowered Islam; its supporters grew so that the defend-
ers of truth became supreme while the defenders of falsehood were 
subdued.59
55 See al-Ṣadafī, Tārīkh, vol. 2, Tārīkh al-Ghurabāʾ. 
56 ‘Although the work is said to be published, its full text has not been available.’ Rosenthal, 
‘The Stranger’, 60. ʿAbbās, ‘Kitāb al-Ghurabāʾ’.
57 See the list of lost works in the editor’s introduction to al-Ājurrī, Kitāb al-Ghurabāʾ, 12.
58 Al-Ājurrī, Kitāb al-Ghurabāʾ, 23–30. See n. 37 for references to collections that  
contain narrations with the phrase alladhīna yuṣliḥūna idhā fasada al-nās, or similar 
renderings.
59 Al-Ājurrī, Kitāb al-Ghurabāʾ, 31.
92 
YOUSHAA PATEL

  
‘BLESSED ARE THE STRANGERS’ 
93
Al-Ājurrī then speculates on the more mysterious question of why Islam 
‘will [one day] return to being strange’. He surmises that the masses will be 
misled by their passions (al-ahwāʾ), so that the minority who adhere to the 
sharīʿa will become ghurabāʾ once again. To support this interpretation, 
he cites the famous hadith in which Muhammad prophesies that Islam 
will fracture into seventy-three sects, but only one will prevail.60 Like the 
text of the hadith, al-Ājurrī’s gloss follows a simple rise-and-fall narrative, 
in which Islam’s transformation into a flourishing civilisation removes it 
from obscurity only for Muslims to lose their way and return to obscurity.
Based on this interpretation, al-Ājurrī describes the ghurabāʾ as true 
adherents to the Qur’an and Sunna of Muhammad; they are people who 
courageously resist the social pressure of family and friends to leave the 
straight path. Unfortunately, al-Ājurrī warns, their perseverance leads 
them to isolation and misery:
He [the stranger] is sad all the time – he is sad when he awakens 
and he is sad when he falls asleep. He is overwhelmed with grief 
and deprived of joy – as if condemned to [life in] prison. He is given 
to weeping, like an exile in a foreign land who has no friends . . . if 
you were to behold him in his solitude, he would be crying from 
the burning pain in his heart, moaning and sighing, tears streaming 
down his cheeks. If you saw him – not knowing who he was – you 
would think him a parent who has just lost his child . . .61
Al-Ājurrī reassures the reader that this misery stems not from the fear of 
material loss but from deep concern over his spiritual life. He closes the 
section with poems that vividly depict the stranger’s noble suffering – the 
misery, loneliness and sadness endured by the spiritual outcast who refuses 
to follow the crowd.
In the following section, al-Ājurrī elevates the stranger’s virtue into a 
distinct spiritual rank that ordinary believers should strive to attain. Inter-
twining the apocalyptic with the ascetic, he cites another famous hadith, 
in which the Prophet Muhammad urged Ibn ʿUmar, ‘Be in this world as if 
you were a stranger (gharīb), or a traveller, and count yourself among the 
dead’.62 This hadith is included in canonical collections of hadith, and also 
in early Islamic treatises on asceticism.63 Like the hadith of al-ghurabāʾ, 
this hadith ascribes a positive value to the gharīb, although the meaning 
of the hadith differs; that is, being a gharīb not only signifies physical exile 
60 Al-Ājurrī, Kitāb al-Ghurabāʾ, 31.
61 Al-Ājurrī, Kitāb al-Ghurabāʾ, 33–34.
62 Al-Ājurrī, Kitāb al-Ghurabāʾ, 36–37.
63 See, for example, Ibn Ḥanbal, Kitāb al-Zuhd, 14–15.

 to a foreign land, but also spiritual exile from this world to the world to 
come. Wandering from place to place, the exile has no permanent home, 
just as the true believer has no permanent home in this world; he already 
counts himself among the dead. The gharīb’s nomadic lifestyle embodies 
this spiritual ideal, reminding the believer that because nothing in this 
world lasts, he should reign in his passions and remain detached. Al-Ājurrī 
elaborates on the apparent meaning of the hadith by portraying a hypo-
thetical scenario in which a man has been blessed with ‘wealth and chil-
dren . . . a beautiful wife and a large house, fine clothes and good food’, 
but is compelled to depart on a journey.64 The journey takes him far away, 
until he eventually loses everything, and becomes a stranger in a strange 
land. He wants nothing more than to return home to his family, and so 
he resolves to return. During his exile, despite suffering from the pain of 
isolation and sadness, his perspective on life evolves: ‘everything in the 
world becomes unimportant to him until his journey ends and he returns 
home’.65 This single-minded focus on his destination enables the gharīb 
to observe exemplary self-discipline and avoid distractions like petty 
interpersonal conflicts: ‘he is gentle with the one who is rude to him; he 
refrains from harming one who harms him; and he ignores one who acts 
ignorantly toward him’.66 Like a modern-day self-help manual, al-Ājurrī 
then directs his attention to the reader, turning the commentary into a 
homily: ‘If you behave in this way, you will become a gharīb, a travel-
ler who remains inconspicuous in this world and pursues the world to 
come.’67 In this vein, Kitāb al-Ghurabāʾ comes to resemble early Islamic 
treatises on asceticism (zuhd) that portray ideal Muslim piety.68 
The third and fourth sections of al-Ājurrī’s treatise deepen its ascetic 
orientation; the third illustrates that people who appear lowly to others 
may in fact be exalted before God: ‘Blessed (ṭūbā) is the servant (ʿabd), 
whose feet become covered in dust [fighting] in the path of God, his hair 
disheveled.’69 Though not labelled a gharīb in this hadith cited by al-Ājurrī, 
the poor and dishevelled ‘servant’ nonetheless resembles a gharīb, his filthy 
appearance a stark contrast to his inner piety. The fourth section on lov-
ing the gharīb is comprised of hagiographical anecdotes of well-known 
early ascetics such as Mālik b. Dīnār (d. 130/747–748), Sufyān al-Thawrī 
64 Al-Ājurrī, Kitāb al-Ghurabāʾ, 40–41.
65 Al-Ājurrī, Kitāb al-Ghurabāʾ, 41.
66 Al-Ājurrī, Kitāb al-Ghurabāʾ, 41.
67 Al-Ājurrī, Kitāb al-Ghurabāʾ, 41.
68 Christopher Melchert has published many excellent studies on early Muslim ascetics 
(renunciants) and their treatises: ‘Aḥmad Ibn Ḥanbal’s Book of Renunciation’; ‘Early 
Renunciants’; ‘Before Ṣūfiyyāt’; ‘Renunciation’; ‘Ibn al-Mubārak’s Kitāb al-Jihād’.
69 Al-Ājurrī, Kitāb al-Ghurabāʾ, 46. Also see al-Bukhārī, Ṣaḥīḥ, 518 (Kitāb al-jihād, bāb 
al-hirāsa fī al-ghazwi fī sabīl Allāh).
94 
YOUSHAA PATEL

  
‘BLESSED ARE THE STRANGERS’ 
95
(d. 161/777–778) and Dhū al-Nūn al-Miṣrī (d. 245–246/860–861). In one 
anecdote, Dhū al-Nūn introduces himself to a woman, saying ‘“I am a 
stranger.” She replies, “Stranger! When one is [always] with God, how is 
it possible to experience the sorrow of ghurba? He is the friend of strang-
ers and the helper of the helpless.”’ Dhū al-Nūn then begins to cry.70 He 
realises that a gharīb in permanent exile with God is a gharīb in name only. 
True strangers never experience the sadness and isolation that al-Ājurrī 
argues comes to define the experience of ghurba because true strangers 
remain with God wherever they go.
But what is the consolation for strangers who die alone with no one to 
mourn them? In the final section of his treatise, al-Ājurrī describes the value 
of their death – in contrast to their apparent lack of value when alive – by 
citing hadiths that destine strangers for martyrdom (and paradise).71 Only 
ghurabāʾ who become estranged because of their sincere faith, not as a result 
of their impiety, qualify for this elite status. Legitimate reasons to become 
an exile include making the pilgrimage to Mecca for hajj or ʿumra; seek-
ing religious knowledge; visiting friends or family to maintain kinship ties; 
leaving one’s homeland to escape tribulations that may harm one’s faith 
or to earn a sharīʿa-compliant livelihood; and, finally, chasing after one’s 
runaway slave. At the conclusion of this section, al-Ājurrī applauds the  
true gharīb, exclaiming, ‘Blessed is he (ṭūbā la-hu)! Blessed is he (ṭūbā)!’ – 
leaving the reader with echoes of the hadith of al-ghurabāʾ.72
With al-Ājurrī’s commentary on the hadith in mind, I now turn to com-
mentaries written after the fourth/tenth century; these reveal both continu-
ity and change in the discourse on estrangement. During the fifth/eleventh 
and sixth/twelfth centuries, Muslim thinkers across dār al-Islām from 
Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr (d. 463/1071) and Qāḍī ʿIyāḍ al-Yaḥṣubī (d. 544/1149) 
in the west (maghrib) to Abū Ḥāmid al-Ghazālī (d. 505/1111) in the east 
(mashriq) cited and commented on the hadith, laying the epistemic foun-
dations for later commentaries authored by scholars during seventh/thir-
teenth to eighth/fourteenth centuries.73 These later commentators include 
the Andalusī Mālikī jurist Abū Isḥāq al-Shāṭibī (d. 790/1388), the Persian  
poet, Jalāl al-Dīn Rūmī (d. 672/1273), and a group of interconnected 
scholars from the Mamlūk dynasty: Ibn Taymiyya and his student, Ibn 
Qayyim al-Jawziyya (d. 751/1350), and his student, Ibn Rajab al-Ḥanbalī 
(d. 795/1393), as well as the Cairene Mālikī jurist, Ibn al-Ḥājj al-ʿAbdarī  
(d. 737/1336), and the Alexandrian Shādhilī Sufi, Ibn ʿAṭāʾ Allāh al-Iskandarī 
70 Al-Ājurrī, Kitāb al-Ghurabāʾ, 64–65.
71 Al-Ājurrī, Kitāb al-Ghurabāʾ, 76–91.
72 Al-Ājurrī, Kitāb al-Ghurabāʾ, 91.
73 Qāḍī ʿIyāḍ’s brief gloss on the hadith is included in al-Nawawī’s commentary on Muslim. 
See al-Nawawī, al-Minhāj, 1:354.

 (d. 709/1309). Of these later commentators, only Ibn Rajab al-Ḥanbalī 
composed an independent treatise on the subject, Kashf al-kurba bi-waṣf 
ḥāl ahl al-ghurba. The others composed glosses in relevant sections of  
treatises on other topics. 
In general, I found that these thinkers concentrate far less on the emo-
tional trauma of estrangement than those who composed the treatises in 
the fourth/tenth century discussed above. They appear less concerned with 
the suffering of strangers and more preoccupied with defining their identity 
and its relevance to Islamic orthodoxy and history. Although most narra-
tions of the hadith pose the question of ‘who are the ghurabāʾ’, the responses 
generally identify them through their behaviour (i.e. ‘those who depart from 
their tribes’ or ‘those who revive the Sunna’). They do not name a specific 
group. Later commentators, however, commonly invoke the ghurabāʾ as a 
distinctive label linked to a specific community of Muslims. In a seventh-/
thirteenth-century commentary on Nahj al-balāgha, the Muʿtazalī, Ibn Abī 
al-Ḥadīd (d. 656/1258), explains that Muslims in his era saw the gharīb 
through their own distinctive ideological lens: 
The Imāmī Shīʿa claim the intended meaning is the Mahdī . . . the 
Sufis claim it means the friend of God . . . our companions [the 
Muʿtazalīs] claim that God will not leave the Muslim community 
without a group of true believers, ʿulamāʾ who uphold justice and 
divine unity [i.e. Muʿtazalīs] . . . the philosophers claim that what is 
intended is the gnostic (ʿārif).74 
Thus, it should not be surprising that nearly all the commentators dis-
cussed below were considered, or considered themselves, ghurabāʾ; that is, 
outcasts whose true virtue was unknown to the ignorant masses. ‘When I 
desired to walk upright upon the path,’ writes al-Shāṭibī, ‘I found myself a 
stranger among the majority of people in my era.’75 
To trace the evolving Muslim politics of estrangement, I organise 
my analysis of classical commentaries on the hadith around three broad 
themes: piety, apocalypse, and orthodoxy. 
The Truest Stranger
While al-Ājurrī portrayed the stranger as a religious model to follow, the 
adulation of later commentators went even further, transforming the fig-
ure from the ideal Muslim to the spiritual master. This conceptual devel-
opment illustrates how the figure of the gharīb became incorporated in 
74 Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd, Sharḥ, 10:56–57.
75 Al-Shāṭibī, al-Iʿtiṣām, 1:15.
96 
YOUSHAA PATEL

  
‘BLESSED ARE THE STRANGERS’ 
97
the distinctive nomenclature of the Sufis. In Madārij al-sālikīn (Spiritual 
ranks of the seekers), a multi-volume commentary on the fifth-/eleventh-
century Sufi treatise of Shaykh al-Anṣārī al-Harawī (d. 481/1088), entitled 
Manāzil al-sāʾirīn, Ibn al-Qayyim al-Jawziyya comments on the hadith 
of al-ghurabāʾ.76 According to Ibn al-Qayyim, the most essential charac-
teristic of strangers is that they are a minority. By the grace of God, they 
possess a set of distinctive traits that few possess. To be a stranger is thus 
relative: Muslims are strangers among unbelievers; Sunnī Muslims (ahl  
al-sunna) are strangers among deviant sects; true believers (muʾminūn) are 
strangers among Muslims; and religious scholars are strangers among the 
true believers.77 These groups and subgroups are all strangers in some way, 
depending on the comparison drawn. We may thus view the experience 
of being a stranger along a spectrum. As the strangers’ degree of estrange-
ment from society increases their spiritual rank also increases, as they  
turn away from other people and toward God. 
Ibn al-Qayyim categorises strangers into three types, each possessing  
a distinct moral valence. The first and most praiseworthy category is  
comprised of the people of God, who are fervent supporters of the Sunna. 
They are never truly alone. Though poor, unknown and unloved, these 
strangers are at home with God. The second and most blameworthy cat-
egory is comprised of those who oppose the Sunna. This kind of stranger 
is truly alone and truly strange. The final category, who inhabit a morally 
ambiguous space that is neither praiseworthy nor blameworthy, encom-
pass all humanity. They must endure the existential condition of being 
spiritually homesick. Ibn al-Qayyim encourages these strangers to ‘Be in 
this world as if you were a stranger, or traveller’.78 Unlike al-Ājurrī who 
reads this well-known hadith as a sign of the gharīb’s elite spiritual status, 
Ibn al-Qayyim reads it as a general commentary on the human condition – 
the condition of being estranged from God.
Ibn Rajab al-Ḥanbalī shared his teacher’s stratified view of spiritual 
estrangement. In Kashf al-kurba, Ibn Rajab classifies strangers into the 
ghurabāʾ of the outward realm (ẓāhir) and the ghurabāʾ of the inward realm 
(bāṭin). Drawing from a statement attributed to the Persian mystic, Yaḥyā b. 
Muʿādh (d. 258/872), ‘the ascetic (zāhid) is a stranger to the dunyā and the 
gnostic (ʿārif) is a stranger to the ākhira’, Ibn Rajab defines the ghurabāʾ of 
the ẓāhir as the ascetic and the ghurabāʾ of the bāṭin as the gnostic.79
The Shādhilī Sufi master, Abū al-ʿAbbās al-Mursī (d. 686/1287), 
appears to have also glossed the aphorism attributed to Yaḥyā b. Muʿādh:  
76 Ibn al-Qayyim al-Jawziyya, Madārij al-sālikīn, 3:184–195.
77 Ibn al-Qayyim al-Jawziyya, Madārij al-sālikīn, 3:186.
78 Ibn al-Qayyim al-Jawziyya, Madārij al-sālikīn, 3:190.
79 Ibn Rajab, ‘Kashf al-kurba’, 329.

 ‘An ascetic (zāhid) is a stranger to the dunyā because the ākhira is his true 
home, while a gnostic (ʿārif) is a stranger to the ākhira because he is with 
God.’80 A student of al-Mursī, Ibn ʿAṭāʾ Allāh al-Iskandarī later wrote a gloss 
on his teacher’s gloss. Citing the hadith of al-ghurabāʾ, he explains that the 
sincere ascetic becomes estranged from this world, but is at home in the 
next. The gnostic, however, is truly rarified, elevated through his sincerity 
and devotion to another spiritual level altogether. He feels estranged not 
only from the dunyā, but also from the ākhira because he feels at home 
only with God. No one, besides the prophets themselves, is more estranged 
from material reality than an ʿārif. 
The celebrated Persian Sufi, Jalāl al-Dīn Rūmī, as well as those in his entou-
rage, also viewed the gharīb as the supreme spiritual master. Rūmī’s spiritual 
teacher, Shams al-Dīn of Tabrīz (d. 645/1247), once told Rūmī’s son: ‘The 
secret of [Rūmī] is veiled as is the secret of Islam. Like Islam, he has come as a 
gharīb. See how his secret shall be as “Islam began as a gharīb and will return 
as a gharīb. Blessed are the strangers!”’81 Here, Shams al-Dīn compares Rūmī 
to the religion of Islam itself, drawing an analogy to the obscure manner in 
which they each entered the world through the hadith of al-ghurabāʾ. As the 
Persian Sufi, Fakhr al-Dīn ʿIrāqī (d. 688/1289), explains, ‘No one understood 
Mowlānā [Rūmī] as he ought to be [understood]. He came into this world a 
gharīb and departed from it a gharīb.’82 Because the spiritual limitations of the 
masses prevented them from perceiving Rūmī’s true spiritual greatness, they 
could not truly know or understand Rūmī, and, in this sense, he entered and 
departed the world as a stranger. The gharīb also appears in Rūmī’s grand 
collection of Persian poetry, the Masnavī, as figures who realised their full 
spiritual potential, such as a physician who assists a handmaiden in cutting 
her ties with the material world, and as a gazelle whose spiritual condition  
is misjudged by a myopic donkey consumed by its carnal passions.83 
Apocalypse Now?
Iḥsān ʿAbbās considered the question of how ‘Islam began strange’ as the 
‘simplest’ (absaṭ) question implicitly posed by the hadith of al-ghurabāʾ 
because it could be answered using available historical data and without 
much speculation.84 Al-Ājurrī, for example, described the first Muslim con-
verts as ‘disgraced and despised’.85 Later commentators conformed to this 
reading, but added more detail. Ibn al-Qayyim believed that the ghurabāʾ 
80 Al-Iskandarī, Laṭāʾif al-minan, 149–150.
81 Aflākī, Manāqeb al-ʿārefīn, 1:308–309; translation from Pifer, ‘The Stranger’s Voice’, 57.
82 Aflākī, Manāqeb al-ʿārefīn, 1:400. Translation from Pifer, ‘The Stranger’s Voice’, 57.
83 Rūmī, Masnavī-yi Maʿnavī, 1:48–50, 3:54–9. See also, Pifer, ‘The Stranger’s Voice’, 70–79.
84 ʿAbbās, ‘Kitāb al-Ghurabāʾ’, 94.
85 Al-Ājurrī, Kitāb al-Ghurabāʾ, 31.
98 
YOUSHAA PATEL

  
‘BLESSED ARE THE STRANGERS’ 
99
in the early years of Islam are best described as ‘those who left their tribes’. 
After all, the first Arab Muslim converts fled from Mecca to Abyssinia, and 
later to Medina, as refugees.86 Nor was the extent of their ghurba limited to 
their small number; as foreigners in a foreign land they were weak and poor, 
estranged from their families and their homeland. They – and therefore 
Islam – were gharīb in nearly every sense of the term. Al-Shāṭibī describes 
how the Prophet Muhammad overcame many obstacles, including wars, 
economic boycotts and persecution from his own tribe and relatives.87 In 
exceptional situations, even ‘verbally denying God (kufr) under duress’ was 
permitted as ‘a clear’, and perhaps ultimate, ‘form of strangeness’.88
But, as we know, the hadith’s content is not limited to the historical 
origins of Islam. It includes the more enigmatic prophecy that Islam ‘will 
[one day] become strange just as it began’. This prophecy also assumes 
that Islam will enter a period in which it is not strange. It is now common 
knowledge that Islam became ascendant and Muslims became a powerful 
majority in dār al-Islām. However, the hadith forecasts that history will 
come full circle. Islam will become strange once again and Muslims will 
again become a besieged minority. But it remains a mystery when this glory 
will begin to fade, and what will cause it. Has the process of decline already 
begun or is it still yet to come?
Commentators had different opinions. As already mentioned, al-Ājurrī 
predicted that Muslims would be overtaken by their passions and begin to 
follow their own opinions over the Sunna, but he refrained from declar-
ing when and where this will take place. During a pilgrimage to Mecca in 
353/964, al-Tawḥīdī transmits a grim commentary on the hadith of the 
ghurabāʾ he has heard from one of his companions:
[The gharīb] is the one who flees from city to city, from mountaintop 
to mountaintop, from country to country, from sea to land, until he 
finds safety. But how can he find safety as these fires engulf east and 
west and scorch crops and cattle, which [encircle humanity] and seal 
every mouth, silence every voice, perplex every genius, choke the one 
drinking, and embitter the taste of the one eating? Dwelling upon 
this matter takes hold of the mind, distresses the soul, and burns the 
heart in anguish.89
Are the stranger’s futile attempts to escape these ‘fires’ a metaphor for the 
tribulations (fitan) taking place before them or an ominous prophecy of 
the end times?
86 Ibn al-Qayyim al-Jawziyya, Madārij al-sālikīn, 3:188–189.
87 Al-Shāṭibī, al-Iʿtiṣām, 1:7.
88 Al-Shāṭibī, al-Iʿtiṣām, 1:9.
89 Al-Tawḥīdī, al-Imtāʿ wa-l-muʾānasa, 208.

 In Ibn Rajab al-Ḥanbalī’s reading, the historical arc of Islam began to 
descend soon after the Prophet’s death. After the reigns of the first two 
caliphs, Abū Bakr and ʿUmar, ‘Satan worked his machinations on the 
Muslim community, inciting distrust and division between them . . . until, 
slowly but surely, the majority succumbed to it’.90 Al-Shāṭibī, whose view 
I discuss in more detail below, agreed, stating that this decline began ‘as 
the era of the Companions came to an end’.91 Ibn al-Qayyim al-Jawziyya, 
on the other hand, believed that this prophecy had already come to pass: 
‘Today, true Islam has become stranger than it was when it first appeared –  
even though its external signs and forms are now widespread! True Islam 
has become very strange; and its people are the strangest of people.’92 
Belonging to the vanguard of true Islam, Ibn al-Qayyim appears to con-
sider himself among the ghurabāʾ of his era.
In the relatively early Imāmī Shīʿī compilation of apocalyptic narratives, 
Kamāl al-dīn wa-tamām al-niʿma, al-Shaykh al-Ṣadūq cites the hadith of 
al-ghurabāʾ on the authority of ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib as scriptural evidence for 
the return of the hidden imam during the end times.93 In one instance, it is 
used to refute the theological objections of Zaydī Shīʿīs, and in another, it 
refers to Zayd b. ʿAmr b. Nawfal, a pre-Islamic monotheist (ḥanīf) who died 
while awaiting the advent of a new prophet. In both contexts, al-Shaykh 
al-Ṣadūq mobilises the hadith to connect the Islamic past to the present: 
‘If we take a moment to reflect, we find that the condition of prophets and 
nations in the past resembles the condition of our nation [today].’94 Recall-
ing that in its early days, Islam was scorned by sceptics, he remarks, ‘It is 
just as the ignoramuses question us today: “When will this Mahdī, whom 
you claim will appear, actually appear?” One community denies him while 
another believes in him.’95 But looking toward the future, he reassures the 
reader that just as the emergence of prophets silenced the sceptics, so will 
the reemergence of the hidden imam silence them. 
In the Majmūʿat al-fatāwa which, despite its name, encompasses numer-
ous subjects beyond law (for example, hadith commentary), Ibn Taymiyya 
reminds readers that whenever Islam becomes strange, a renewer (mujad-
did) arises who makes Islam familiar again.96 One such renewer was ʿUmar 
b. ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz (r. 99–101/717–720), who reigned as Umayyad caliph 
at the end of the first/seventh century. Islamic history is thus seasonal. 
It has its ups and downs. According to Ibn Taymiyya, Islam’s ghurba is  
90 Ibn Rajab, ‘Kashf al-kurba’, 317.
91 Al-Shāṭibī, al-Iʿtiṣām, 1:10.
92 Ibn al-Qayyim al-Jawziyya, Madārij al-sālikīn, 3:188.
93 Al-Qummī, Kamāl al-dīn, 72, 193–194.
94 Al-Qummī, Kamāl al-dīn, 71.
95 Al-Qummī, Kamāl al-dīn, 193.
96 Ibn Taymiyya, Majmūʿa, 18:292–305.
100 
YOUSHAA PATEL

  
‘BLESSED ARE THE STRANGERS’ 
101
never absolute. At any historical moment, some dimensions of Islam may 
be strange in some places and not others. In places where Islam becomes 
strange, true adherents of the sharīʿa are ghurabāʾ, and therefore blessed. 
However, Muslims who refuse to exert effort and fail to prevent the masses 
from committing vices are sinful and lacking in faith.
It is reasonable to wonder if this cyclical view of history undermines 
the famous hadith, which declares that the first generations of Muslims 
are the best generations of humanity. Ibn Taymiyya reassures the reader 
that this hadith still holds true, although it may not apply to every single 
Muslim from the first generation: ‘Perhaps this statement only applies to a 
limited number of people in a generation just as it applies to a limited num-
ber of Muslims in some respects, as is customary in every era.’97 That is, 
some Muslims in later generations are in fact spiritually superior to some 
Muslims from the first generation. In this moderately progressive view of 
human history, the ghurabāʾ represent the best Muslims of every genera-
tion until the day of judgement.
Orthodoxy
As implied in the discourses above, an underlying concern of Muslim com-
mentators on the hadith of al-ghurabāʾ is the fragility of orthodoxy, or cor-
rect belief. Prophesying the demise of Islam, this hadith alerted the ʿulamāʾ 
to vigilantly guard orthodoxy against the looming threat of reprehensible 
innovations and sectarianism. And given that multiple narrations of this 
hadith define the ghurabāʾ as those who cling to the Sunna, as guardians 
of the Islamic tradition and ‘inheritors of the Prophet’, the ʿulamāʾ were 
charged with defending orthodoxy.98 As Ibn al-Qayyim declared, ʿulamāʾ 
are ghurabāʾ among the masses. But this self-perception had set in centu-
ries earlier with the rise of ʿulamāʾ as a distinct class. In the fifth/eleventh 
century, the Andalusī Mālikī judge Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr cited a tradition stat-
ing that ‘the ʿulamāʾ are strangers due to the ignorance of the masses’.99 In 
his great summa of Islamic spirituality, the Iḥyāʾ ʿulūm al-dīn, Abū Ḥāmid 
al-Ghazālī drew on Abū Ṭālib al-Makkī’s (d. 386/996) commentary on the 
hadith of al-ghurabāʾ and lamented that true ʿulamāʾ are strangers in his 
era. He claimed that the masses had succumbed to reprehensible innova-
tions, while the original religious wisdom of the first Muslims had been 
forgotten.100 ‘Those who even mention them are scorned.’101 
 97 Ibn Taymiyya, Majmūʿa, 18:303.
 98 Gilliot, ‘ʿUlamāʾ’, in EI2.
 99 Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, Jamiʿ bayān, 120.
100 Al-Makkī, Qūt al-qulūb, 1:259; al-Ghazālī, Iḥyāʾ ʿulūm al-dīn, 1:110; al-Ghazālī, Kitāb 
al-ʿIlm, 105.
101 Al-Ghazālī, Iḥyāʾ ʿulūm al-dīn, 1:110.

 Ibn Taymiyya’s commentary on the hadith begins with a defence of 
orthodoxy. He refutes the reading that it is permissible for strangers to 
leave Islam by citing several Qur’anic verses that, at face value, claim that 
Islam is the sole path to salvation: ‘Anyone who seeks to follow a dīn other 
than Islam will not find it accepted [by God], and in the afterlife, he will 
be among the losers’ (Q. 3:85). ‘When Islam arrived as an obscure entity,’ 
Ibn Taymiyya elaborates, ‘other dīns became unacceptable [as paths to 
salvation].’102 
Ibn Rajab al-Ḥanbalī also worried about the fragility of orthodoxy. 
Quoting the early Muslim authority, Sufyān al-Thawrī, ‘Treat the adher-
ents of the Sunna well for they are the [true] strangers’, Ibn Rajab argues 
that following the Sunna requires that correct belief be safeguarded from 
any doubt in God, scriptures, prophets, angels, the day of judgement and 
divine predestination.103 Unfortunately, for Ibn Rajab, the number of true 
adherents of the Sunna dwindles with the passage of time. 
But the most compelling defence of orthodoxy as strangeness came 
from Abū Isḥāq al-Shāṭibī in his treatise against innovations, al-Iʿtiṣām 
(Holding on), in which he frames himself at the outset as a minority of one:
When I resolved to walk straight upon the path [of Truth], I found 
myself a stranger among the majority of people in my era because 
their everyday behaviours were dominated by customs and their 
original traditions were polluted by unnecessary innovations that 
did not even exist in earlier times, let alone our time!104
He explains that he was removed from his post of imam because he refused 
to supplicate for the rightly guided caliphs or for the rulers during the  
Friday sermon. According to al-Shāṭibī, he was forced to choose between 
following the Sunna and opposing the practices of the masses or opposing 
the Sunna and following the practices of the masses. Having opted for the 
former, he says, ‘they smeared me with labels linking me to sects that are 
outside the Sunna’.105
Al-Shāṭibī, in fact, centres his narrative of how ‘Islam will [one day] 
return to being strange’ on the rise of sectarianism, which frames how he 
positions himself in the treatise:
The [power and influence] of Islam continued to expand and  
[its adherents] followed the straight path during the lifetime of the 
102 Ibn Taymiyya, Majmūʿa, 18:292.
103 Ibn Rajab, ‘Kashf al-kurba’, 319.
104 Al-Shāṭibī, al-Iʿtiṣām, 1:15.
105 Al-Shāṭibī, al-Iʿtiṣām, 1:19. 
102 
YOUSHAA PATEL

  
‘BLESSED ARE THE STRANGERS’ 
103
Prophet and during the lifetimes of most of the Companions – until 
there arose heretics who deviated from the Prophet’s way (Sunna) 
and inclined toward misleading innovations, like the Qadariyya and 
the Khawārij . . . and this all took place as the era of the Companions 
came to an end.
The number of sects continued to increase, as prophesied by the 
Truthful One [the Prophet] who said, ‘Jews and Christians will split 
into seventy-one sects, but my community will split into seventy-
three.’ In another hadith, he [the Prophet] said, ‘“You will follow 
the ways of those nations who preceded you, span by span, cubit  
by cubit, so that if they entered a lizard’s hole you would follow 
them.” We asked, “O Messenger of God, do you mean the Jews and 
Christians?” He replied, “Who else?”’106
Al-Shāṭibī, like al-Ājurrī and Ibn al-Qayyim al-Jawziyya before him, 
cites the famous hadith prophesying that Islam will splinter into seventy-
three sects, and only one will prevail. He adds another well-known hadith 
prophesying that Muslims will follow Jews and Christians down a ‘lizard’s 
hole’, meaning that they will succumb to the same fate of fracturing into 
warring sectarian factions. He continues:
God fulfilled His promise to the Prophet that Islam would become 
strange once again, because strangeness happens only if its dev-
otees are few, or have become extinct. When that happens, right 
becomes wrong and wrong becomes right; Sunna becomes innova-
tion and innovation becomes Sunna. Meanwhile, the true devotees 
of the Sunna are subject to denunciation and criticism from her-
etics who are eager for the voices of misguidance to come together 
[and prevail].
But God prevents these voices from coming together until the 
day of judgement. So these heretical sects will not join forces against 
the Sunna, either in theory or in practice. Rather, the true devotees of 
the Sunna will remain firm [on the path of Truth] until God’s decree 
comes to pass. Nevertheless, deviant sects will relentlessly attack the 
adherents of the Sunna, inciting hostility and hatred in the process, 
hoping they will eventually succumb to the pressure and conform. 
As a result, the true devotees of the Sunna will remain engaged in 
struggle and conflict, defending [the truth] day and night. By means 
of this trial, God will augment their bounty and repay them with an 
immense reward.107
106 Al-Shāṭibī, al-Iʿtiṣām, 1:10–11.
107 Al-Shāṭibī, al-Iʿtiṣām, 1:12–13.

 A complete reversal of fortunes, as prophesied by the hadith of 
al-ghurabāʾ in which right becomes wrong and wrong becomes right and 
Sunna becomes innovation and innovation becomes Sunna, will not occur 
until the end days. In the meanwhile, however, ‘devotees of the Sunna’ – 
true ghurabāʾ – ’will remain engaged in struggle and conflict, defending 
[the truth] day and night’.108
In fighting for orthodoxy and against reprehensible innovations, then, 
these ‘connective figures’ – Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, al-Ghazālī, Ibn al-Qayyim 
al-Jawziyya, Ibn Rajab al-Ḥanbalī, Ibn Taymiyya and al-Shāṭibī – viewed 
themselves as ghurabāʾ, defined mainly by their role as Sunnī ʿulamāʾ, 
which entailed their intellectual distance from the Muslim majority. What 
is more, for many of them, their intellectual exile was enhanced by physical 
exile as well. For several years, al-Ghazālī voluntarily left his family, friends 
and illustrious scholarly career in Baghdad to venture alone in search of 
himself; during this journey he wrote his most spiritually potent works.109 
Ibn Taymiyya spent his final years in prison, alone.110 And al-Shāṭibī was 
exiled from his own mosque. There can be little doubt that exile expanded 
their imaginations of ghurba beyond the zone of scholarship; it taught 
them to see themselves, the world and God anew.
The Stranger’s Jihad
Modern-day extremists, self-proclaimed ghurabāʾ, have likened ‘fighting 
in the path of God’ (Q. 2:190) to an exilic journey. But in my study of 
fifteen classical manuals on jihad, I could not find a complete narration 
of the hadith of al-ghurabāʾ in any of them.111 I found only one narration 
108 Al-Shāṭibī, al-Iʿtiṣām, 1:13.
109 For al-Ghazālī’s autobiographical account of his spiritual and intellectual journey, see 
al-Ghazālī, al-Ghazali’s Path to Sufism. For an illuminating discussion on the relation-
ship of exile (ghurba) to creativity and imagination in al-Ghazālī’s life and works, see 
Moosa, Ghazālī and the Poetics of Imagination, 119–138, 275–280.
110 Little, ‘The Historical’; Bori, ‘A New Source’. Also see Ibn Taymiyya’s alleged letters 
from prison: Ibn Taymiyya, Rasāʾil min al-sijn.
111 I surveyed the following treatises on jihad: Ibn al-Mubārak (d. 181/797), Kitāb al-Jihād; 
Ibn Jamāʿa (d. 733/1333), Mustanad and Mukhtaṣar fī faḍl al-jihād; Abū Yaʿqūb Isḥāq b. 
Ibrāhīm al-Harawī al-Qarrāb (d. 429/1037), Faḍāʾil al-ramī fī sabīl Allāh; ʿAlī b. Ṭāhir b. 
Jaʿfar al-Sulamī (d. 500/1107), Kitāb al-Jihād; al-Qāḍī Abū al-Maḥāsin Yūsuf b. Shaddād (d. 
632/1235), Kitāb Faḍāʾil al-jihād; Ibn Kathīr (d. 774/1373), Kitāb Ijtihād fī ṭalab al-jihād; 
Ibn ʿAbd al-Salām (d. 660/1262–63), Aḥkām al-jihād; Ibn Asākir (d. 571/1176), al-Arbaʿūn 
fī ḥathth; Ibn Baṭṭa al-ʿUkbarī al-Ḥanbalī (d. 387/997), Sabʿūn ḥadīth; al-Wāsiṭī (d. 
618/1221), Kitāb al-Arbaʿīn fī al-jihād; al-ʿIrāqī (d. 804/1404), Kitāb al-Arbaʿīn al-ʿishāriyya; 
al-ḍaḥḥāk (d. 287/900), Kitāb al-Jihād; Ibn al-Naḥḥās (d. 814/1411), Mashārīʿ al-ashwāq; 
and Ibn Aṣbagh (d. 620/1223–4), Kitāb al-Injād. The treatises of al-Sulamī, Ibn Shaddād, 
and Ibn Kathīr have also been collected and published by Suhayl Zakkār in the edited vol-
ume, Arbaʿat kutub fī al-jihād min aṣr al-ḥurūb al-Ṣalībiyya. 
104 
YOUSHAA PATEL

  
‘BLESSED ARE THE STRANGERS’ 
105
in which the Companion Ibn ʿUmar (not the Prophet Muhammad), pro-
claims, ‘Blessed are the strangers who are righteous despite [widespread] 
corruption among the masses’, without the key prefatory statement that 
‘Islam began strange . . .’ This is cited in Kitāb al-Jihād of ʿAbdallāh b. 
al-Mubārak (d. 181/797), the first such compilation ever written.112 In 
fact, the earliest complete apocalyptic treatise to survive, Kitāb al-Fitan 
(Book of tribulations) of Nuʿaym b. Ḥammād al-Marwazī (d. 228/843–4), 
includes the hadith of al-ghurabāʾ in a chapter entitled Iʿtizāl (On retreat 
and seclusion) in the face of widespread tribulations. In this context, how-
ever, the hadith is an exhortation to stay home, not fight in war.113 
Although this finding does not mean that modern-day extremists lack 
any grounds on which to view themselves as strangers, or that premodern 
Muslim soldiers never viewed themselves as strangers, the absence of the 
hadith of al-ghurabāʾ from classical manuals on jihad does suggest that the 
label of ghurabāʾ did not signal jihad as prominently as it does today.114 
Although the premodern ghurabāʾ and modern-day extremist ghurabāʾ 
both embrace their strangeness and share a common aspiration to find 
belonging in exile, their means of doing so nonetheless diverge. None of 
the premodern commentaries on the hadith of al-ghurabāʾ that I studied 
address the topic of jihad prominently. Again, this does not mean that 
those who perceived themselves as ghurabāʾ never fought in jihad (or that 
such commentaries cannot be found), but that in the most widely read pre-
modern commentaries on the hadith of al-ghurabāʾ, fighting in jihad did 
not define who belonged to the ghurabāʾ. 
What does appear to be an important factor, however, is the strug-
gle against oneself – what the Prophet allegedly called ‘the greater jihad’ 
(al-jihād al-akbar). This is described as an interior battle within an indi-
vidual, not an exterior battle against others.115 Although the commenta-
tors I surveyed did not use this phrase, they nonetheless spoke of being a 
gharīb as an emotional, intellectual and spiritual struggle that may appro-
priately be described as a jihad against oneself. Given that so many of  
112 Ibn al-Mubārak, Kitāb al-Jihād, 181.
113 Al-Marwazī, Kitāb al-Fitan, 108.
114 I would suggest that imagining oneself as a gharīb opens up the potential to lapse 
into a self-righteous delusion in which ‘I am right and everyone else is wrong’. If this 
hubris festers into bitterness and anger, and becomes inflamed with the doctrine  
of jihad, it may mutate into vilification of and violence toward the Other, Muslim or 
non-Muslim. 
115 According to the well-known hadith, whose chain of transmission is nonetheless 
graded as weak or fabricated by critics, the Prophet said, ‘You have come for the best. 
You have come from the smaller jihad to the greater jihad.’ They said, ‘What is the 
greater jihad, Messenger of God?’ He said: ‘The servant’s struggle against his desires.’ 
See D. Cook, Understanding Jihad, 32–48.

 these commentaries were shaped by the discourses of Muslim ascetics and 
Sufis, this should not come as a surprise. Unlike modern-day extremists, 
they did not rush to realise an Islamic utopia here and now, in this world; 
rather, their primary objective was to remind believers that, while they are 
called to resist blind social conformity and become ghurabāʾ, their true 
home is not here in this world, but with God in the world to come.
In this sense, then, classical Muslim thinkers construed being strange 
(gharīb) as a virtue. It is, of course, much easier to follow the crowd than 
to patiently endure the pain of being an outcast. The ghurabāʾs’ courage to 
suffer through the misery of loneliness and exile in this world in pursuit of 
the world to come reflects their sincerity and authenticity. The hadith and 
its commentators impress on the reader that the elect who possess these 
noble attributes in abundance are not to be pitied, but envied. The por-
trayal of non-conformity as a badge of prestige instead of abasement, as 
a virtue instead of a vice, is an inversion of conventional social logic and 
positions the stranger as a model of piety in normative Islam. 
In this chapter, I have contended that the figure of the stranger is  
ironic – that the gharīb, defined by his separation from others, is a con-
nective figure. Most apparently, the stranger’s physical movement across 
geographic boundaries connects people and places. But the stranger’s con-
nectivity is also apparent at the level of discourse, where textual representa-
tions frequently mirror social reality. The heterogeneity of the strangers as 
a category, as we have seen, is reflected in the multiplicity of narrations of 
the hadith of al-ghurabāʾ. And as demonstrated above, classical commenta-
tors connected the discourse and experience of estrangement to key Islamic  
discourses on the apocalypse, orthodoxy and piety. But perhaps most 
importantly, the figure of the stranger connects believers across time, link-
ing the Islamic past to its present and future. Indeed, as the Prophet fore-
told, the end returns to the beginning: ‘Islam began strange, and will [one 
day] return to being strange – just as it began – so blessed are the strangers!’
Bibliography
ʿAbbās, Iḥsān. ‘Kitāb al-Ghurabāʾ li’l-Ājurrī’, Mélanges de l’Université Saint-Joseph 
50, no. 1 (1984): 91–101.
Abū Yaʿlā al-Mawṣīlī. Musnad Abī Yaʿlā. Damascus: Dār al-Maʾmūn li-l-Turāth, 
1984.
Aflākī, Shams al-Dīn Aḥmad. Manāqeb al-ʿārefīn. Edited by T. Yazıcı. 2 vols. 
Ankara: Türk Tarih Kurumu Basımevi, 1959–61.
al-Ājurrī, Abū Bakr. Kitāb al-Ghurabāʾ min al-muʾminīn. Damascus: Dār 
al-Bashāʾir, 1992.
al-Bazzār, Abū Bakr Aḥmad b. ʿAmr. Musnad al-Bazzār. 18 vols. Medina: Maktabat 
al-ʿUlūm wa-l-Ḥikam, 1988–2009.
106 
YOUSHAA PATEL

  
‘BLESSED ARE THE STRANGERS’ 
107
Berg, Herbert. ‘Competing Paradigms in the Study of Islamic Origins: Qurʾān 
15:89–91 and the Value of Isnāds.’ In H. Berg (ed.), Method and Theory in the 
Study of Islamic Origin, pp. 259–290. Leiden: Brill, 2003.
Bori, Caterina. ‘A New Source for the Biography of Ibn Taymiyya.’ Bulletin for the 
School of Oriental and African Studies 67, no. 3 (2004): 321–348. 
al-Bukhārī, Muḥammad b. Ismāʿīl. Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī. Beirut: Dār Ibn Ḥazm, 2002. 
Constable, Olivia Remie. Housing the Stranger in the Mediterranean World:  
Lodging, Trade, and Travel in Late Antiquity and the Middle Ages. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2009.
Cook, David. Contemporary Muslim Apocalyptic Literature. Syracuse: Syracuse 
University Press, 2005.
Cook, David. ‘Ḥadīth, Authority and the End of the World: Traditions in Modern 
Muslim Apocalyptic Literature.’ Oriente Moderno 82, no. 1 (2002): 31–53.
Cook, David. Studies in Muslim Apocalyptic. Princeton, NJ: Darwin Press, 2002
Cook, David. Understanding Jihad. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2005.
Cook, Michael. ‘An Early Apocalyptic Chronicle.’ Journal of Near Eastern Studies 
52, no. 1 (1993): 25–29.
Cook, Michael. ‘Eschatology and the Dating of Traditions.’ Princeton Papers in 
Near Eastern Studies 1 (1992): 23–47.
Creswell, Robyn and Bernard Haykel. ‘Battle Lines: Want to Understand the 
jihadis? Read Their Poetry.’ New Yorker, June 8 and June 15, 2015.
Crone, Patricia and Shmuel Moreh. The Book of Strangers: Medieval Arabic  
Graffiti on the Theme of Nostalgia. Princeton, NJ: Markus Weiner, 2000.
al-ḍaḥḥāk, Ibn Abī ʿĀṣim. Kitāb al-Jihād. Damascus: Dār al-Qalam, 1989.
al-Dārimī, Abū Muḥammad. Sunan al-Dārimī. 4 vols. Riyadh: Dār al-Mughnī  
li-l-Nashr wa-l-Tawzīʿ, 2000.
al-Dhahabī, Shams al-Dīn. Siyar aʿlām al-nubalāʾ. Edited by Shuʿayb al-Arnāʾūṭ. 25 
vols. Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Risāla, 1982.
al-Farāhīdī, Khalīl b. Aḥmad. Kitāb al-ʿAyn. 5 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyya, 
2003.
Fiedler, Leslie A. The Stranger in Shakespeare. London: Paladin, 1974.
Filiu, Jean-Pierre. Apocalypse in Islam. Berkeley: University of California Press, 
2012.
Fishman, Brian. ‘After Zarqawi: The Dilemmas and Future of Al Qaeda in Iraq.’ 
Washington Quarterly 29, no. 4 (2006): 21–23.
al-Ghazālī, Abū Ḥāmid. Iḥyāʾ ʿulūm al-dīn. Edited by Muḥammad Wahbī Sulaymān 
and Usāma ʿUmūra. 5 vols. Damascus: Dār al-Fikr, 2006.
al-Ghazālī, Abū Ḥāmid. Kitāb al-ʿIlm, The Book of Knowledge: Book 1 of the Iḥyāʾ 
ʿulūm al-dīn. The Revival of the Religious Sciences. Translated by Kenneth Hon-
erkamp. Louisville, KY: Fons Vitae, 2015.
al-Ghazālī, Abū Ḥāmid. al-Ghazali’s Path to Sufism and His Deliverance from 
Error: An Annotated Translation of al-Ghazali’s al-Munqidh Min al-Dalal. 
Translated by Richard Joseph McCarthy. Louisville, KY: Fons Vitae Publish-
ing, 2000.
al-Ghazzī, Najm al-Dīn. Luṭf al-samar qaṭf al-thaman. Edited by Maḥmūd  
al-Shaykh. 2 vols. Damascus: Wizārat al-Thaqāfa wa-l-Irshād al-Qawmī, 1981.

 Haider, Najam. ‘The Geography of the Isnād: Possibilities for the Reconstruction 
of Local Ritual Practice in the 2nd/8th Century.’ Der Islam 90, no. 2 (2013): 
306–346.
al-Ḥanbalī, Ibn Baṭṭa al-ʿUkbarī. Sabʿūn ḥadīth fī al-jihād. Cairo: Maktabat 
al-Qurʾān, 1989[?].
al-Harawī, Mullā ʿAlī al-Qārī. Mirqāt al-mafātīḥ: Sharḥ Mishkāt al-Maṣābīḥ. 11 
vols. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyya, 2001.
Husain, Ed. The House of Islam: A Global History. New York: Bloomsbury, 2018.
Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, Yūsuf. Jamiʿ bayān al-ʿilm wa-faḍlihi. Cairo, Idārat al-Ṭibāʿa 
al-Munīriyya, n.d.
Ibn ʿAbd al-Salām, ʿIzz al-Dīn. Aḥkām al-jihād wa-faḍāʾiluh. Jedda: Maktabat Dār 
al-Wafāʾ, 1986.
Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd, ʿAbd al-Ḥamīd. Sharḥ Nahj al-balāgha. 18 vols. Beirut: Dār  
al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyya, 2009.
Ibn Abī Shayba, Abū Bakr. al-Muṣannaf. Edited by Ḥamad al-Jumʿa and 
Muḥammad al-Laḥīdān. 16 vols. Riyadh: Maktabat al-Rushd, 2004.
Ibn Asākir. al-Arbaʿūn fī ḥathth ʿalā al-jihād. Kuwait: Dār al-Khulafāʾ li-l-Kitāb 
al-Islāmī, 1984.
Ibn Aṣbagh, Muḥammad b. ʿIsā. Kitāb al-Injād fī abwāb al-jihād. Abu Dhabi: Dār 
al-Imām Mālik. Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Rayyān, 2005.
Ibn al-Athīr, Majd al-Dīn al-Mubārak b. Muḥammad. al-Nihāya fī gharīb al-ḥadīth 
wa-l-athar. Beirut: Dār al-Maʿrifa, 2011.
Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī. Taqrīb al-tahdhīb. Edited by Muḥammad ʿAwwāma. 1 vol. 
Aleppo: Dār al-Rashīd, 1991.
Ibn Ḥanbal, Aḥmad. Kitāb al-Zuhd. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyya, 1983.
Ibn Ḥanbal, Aḥmad. Musnad. Edited by Shuʿayb al-Arnaʾūṭ et al. 50 vols. Beirut: 
Muʾassasat al-Risāla, 1995–2001. 
Ibn Jamāʿa, Muḥammad b. Ibrāhīm and Abū Yaʿqūb Isḥāq b. Ibrāhīm al-Harawī 
al-Qarrāb. Mustanad al-ajnād fī ālāt al-jihād wa-mukhtaṣar fī faḍl al-jihād. 
Edited by Usāma Nāṣir al-Naqshabandī. Damascus: Dār al-Wathāʾiq, 2008. 
Ibn Kathīr. al-Nihāya fī al-fitan wa-l-malāḥim. 2 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Jīl, 1988.
Ibn Mājah, Abū ʿAbdallāh al-Qazwīnī. Sunan Ibn Mājah. Beirut: Dār Ibn Ḥazm, 
2002. 
Ibn al-Mubārak, ʿAbdallāh. Kitāb al-Jihād. Edited by Nazīh Ḥammād. Jedda: Dār 
al-Maṭbūʿāt al-Ḥadītha, n.d.
Ibn al-Naḥḥās, Aḥmad b. Ibrāhīm. Mashārīʿ al-ashwāq ilā mashāriʿ al-ʿushshāq 
wa-muthīr al-gharām ilā Dār al-Salām: fī faḍāʾil al-jihād. Beirut: Dār al-Bashāʾir 
al-Islāmiyya, 2002.
Ibn al-Qayyim al-Jawziyya. Madārij al-sālikīn. Beirut: Dār al-Kitāb al-ʿArabī, 
2003.
Ibn Rajab al-Ḥanbalī. ‘Kashf al-kurba bi-waṣf ḥāl ahl al-ghurba.’ In Majmūʿ rasāʾil 
al-Ḥāfiẓ ibn Rajab al-Ḥanbalī. Cairo: al-Fārūq al-Ḥadītha li-l-Ṭibāʿa wa-l-Nashr, 
2003.
Ibn Taymiyya, Taqī al-Dīn. Majmūʿat al-fatāwa. Edited by ʿĀmir Jazzār and Anwar 
al-Bāz. 37 vols. Mansoura: Dār al-Wafāʾ, 2005.
Ibn Taymiyya, Taqī al-Dīn. Rasāʾil min al-sijn. Riyadh: Dār Ṭība, 1987.
108 
YOUSHAA PATEL

  
‘BLESSED ARE THE STRANGERS’ 
109
al-Iṣfahānī, al-Rāghib. Mufradāt alfāẓ al-Qurʾān. Edited by Ṣafwān ʿAdnān Dāwūdī. 
Damascus: Dār al-Qalam, 2009.
al-Iskandarī, Aḥmad b. Muḥammad b. ʿAṭāʾ Allāh. Laṭaʾif al-minan fī manāqib 
sayyadī al-Shaykh Abī al-ʿAbbās al-Mursī wa-shaykhihi al-Shaykh Abī al-Ḥasan. 
Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyya, 2017.
Lane, E. W. and Stanley Lane-Poole. An Arabic-English Lexicon. 2 vols. Beirut: 
Librairie du Liban, 1968.
Little, D. P. ‘The Historical and Historiographical Significance of the Detention of 
Ibn Taymiyya.’ International Journal of Middle Eastern Studies 4, no. 3 (1973): 
311–327.
Livne-Kafri, Ofer. ‘Some Notes on the Muslim Apocalyptic Tradition.’ Quaderni di 
Studi Arabi 17 (1999): 71–94.
Madelung, Wilferd. ‘Apocalyptic Prophecies in Ḥimṣ in the Umayyad Age.’ Journal 
of Semitic Studies 31, no. 2 (1986): 141–185.
Madelung, Wilferd. ‘The Sufyānī between Tradition and History.’ Studia Islamica 
63 (1986): 5–48.
al-Makkī, Abū Ṭālib. Qūt al-qulūb fī muʿāmalat al-maḥbūb wa-waṣf ṭarīq al-murīd 
ilā maqām al-tawḥīd. Edited by Bāsil ʿUyūn al-Sūd. 2 vols. Beirut: Dār  
al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyya, 1997.
al-Marwazī, Nuʿaym b. Ḥammād. ‘The Book of Tribulations’: The Syrian Muslim 
Apocalyptic Tradition: An Annotated Translation. Translated by David Cook. 
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2019.
al-Marwazī, Nuʿaym b. Ḥammād. Kitāb al-Fitan. Beirut: Dār al-Fikr, 2003.
McCants, William F. The ISIS Apocalypse: The History, Strategy, and Doomsday 
Vision of the Islamic State. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2015.
Melchert, Christopher. ‘Aḥmad Ibn Ḥanbal’s Book of Renunciation.’ Der Islam 85 
(2008): 345–359.
Melchert, Christopher. ‘Before Ṣūfiyyāt: Female Muslim Renunciants in the 8th 
and 9th Centuries ce.’ Journal of Sufi Studies 5 (2016): 115–139.
Melchert, Christopher. ‘Early Renunciants as Ḥadīth Transmitters.’ Muslim World 
92 (2002): 407–418.
Melchert, Christopher. ‘Ibn al-Mubārak’s Kitāb al-Jihād and Early Renunciant 
Literature.’ In Robert Gleave and István Kristó-Nagy (eds), Violence in Islamic 
Thought from the Qur’ān to the Mongols, pp. 49–69. Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press, 2015.
Melchert, Christopher. ‘Renunciation (Zuhd) in the Early Shiʿi Tradition.’ In  
Farhad Daftary and Gurdofarid Miskinzoda (eds), The Study of Shiʿi Islam: 
History, Theology and Law, pp. 271–294. London: I. B. Tauris, 2014.
Moosa, Ebrahim. Ghazālī and the Poetics of Imagination. Chapel Hill: University 
of North Carolina Press, 2006.
Motzki, Harald. ‘Dating Muslim Traditions: A Survey.’ Arabica 52 (2005):  
204–253.
Motzki, Harald. ‘The Muṣannaf of ʿAbd al-Razzāq al-Ṣanʿānī as a Source of Authen-
tic Aḥādīth of the First Century ah’ Journal of Near Eastern Studies 50 (1991): 
1–21.
Muslim b. Ḥajjāj. Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim. Beirut: Dār Ibn Ḥazm, 2002. 

 al-Nawawī, Sharaf al-Dīn. al-Minhāj fī sharḥ Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim b. al-Ḥajjāj, 10 vols. 
Beirut: Dār al-Maʿrifa, 2001.
Patel, Youshaa. ‘“Whoever Imitates a People Becomes One of Them”: A Hadith 
and Its Interpreters.’ Islamic Law and Society 25, no. 4 (2018): 359–426.
Pifer, Michael. ‘The Age of the Gharīb: Strangers in the Medieval Mediterranean.’ 
In Kathryn Babayan, and Michael Pifer (eds), Armenian Mediterranean: Words 
and Worlds in Motion, pp. 13–37. Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan, 2018.
Pifer, Michael. ‘The Stranger’s Voice: Integrated Literary Cultures in Anatolia 
and the Premodern World.’ PhD dissertation, University of Michigan–Ann 
Arbor, 2014.
al-Quḍāʿī, Abū ʿAbdallāh Muḥammad b. Salāma. Musnad al-Shihāb. 2 vols. Beirut: 
Muʾassasat al-Risāla, 1985.
al-Qummī, al-Shaykh al-Ṣadūq Ibn Bābawayh. Kamāl al-dīn wa-tamām al-niʿma. 
Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Aʿlamī li-l-Maṭbūʿāt, 1991.
Richardson, Kristina. ‘The Invisible Strangers, or Romani History Reconsidered.’ 
History of the Present 10, no. 2 (October 2020): 187–207.
Rosenthal, Franz. ‘The Stranger in Medieval Islam.’ Arabica 44 (1997): 35–75.
Rūmī, Jalāl al-Dīn. Masnavī-yi Maʿnavī. Edited by R. A. Nicholson. 8 vols. Tehran: 
Amīr Kabīr, 1984. 
al-Ṣadafī, Abū Saʿīd b. Yūnus. Tārīkh Ibn Yūnus al-Ṣadafī. 2 vols. Beirut: Dār  
al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyya, 2000.
Sadeghi, Behnam. ‘The Traveling Tradition Test: A Method for Dating Traditions.’ 
Der Islam 85, no. 1 (2008): 203–242.
Shakespeare, William. The Oxford Shakespeare: The Complete Works. Edited by 
Stanley Wells et al. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005.
al-Shāṭibī, Abū Isḥāq. al-Iʿtiṣām. 4 vols. Manama: Maktabat al-Tawḥīd, 2009.
Shoemaker, Stephen J. The Apocalypse of Empire: Imperial Eschatology in Late 
Antiquity and Early Islam. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 
2018.
al-Ṭabarānī, Abū al-Qāsim Sulaymān. al-Muʿjam al-awsaṭ. 10 vols. Cairo: Dār 
al-Ḥaramayn, 1995.
al-Ṭabarānī, Abū al-Qāsim Sulaymān. al-Muʿjam al-kabīr. 25 vols. Cairo: Maktabat 
Ibn Taymiyya, 1983.
al-Ṭaḥāwī, Abū Jaʿfar Aḥmad. Sharḥ Mushkil al-āthār. Edited by Shuʿayb Arnāʾūṭ. 
16 vols. Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Risāla, 1415/1994.
al-Tawḥīdī, Abū Ḥayyān. al-Baṣāʾir wa-l-dhakhāʾir. Edited by Wadād al-Qāḍī. Bei-
rut: Dār Ṣādir, 1988.
al-Tawḥīdī, Abū Ḥayyān. al-Imtāʿ wa-l-muʾānasa. Beirut: Maktabat al-ʿAṣriyya, 
2004.
al-Thaghrī, Abū al-Harith. ‘And as for the Blessing of Your Lord Then Mention It.’ 
Dabiq 12 (2015): 29–32.
al-Tirmidhī, Abū ʿĪsa, Sunan al-Tirmidhī. Beirut: Dār Ibn Ḥazm, 2002. 
al-Tirmidhī, Abū ʿĪsa. Sunan al-Tirmidhī. Edited by Nāṣir al-Dīn al-Albānī. Riyadh: 
Maktabat al-Maʿārif, n.d.
Tsafrir, Nurit. The History of an Islamic School of Law: The Early Spread of Hanaf-
ism. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2004.
110 
YOUSHAA PATEL

  
‘BLESSED ARE THE STRANGERS’ 
111
Velji, Jamel. An Apocalyptic History of the Early Fatimid Empire. Edinburgh:  
Edinburgh University Press, 2016. 
al-Wāsiṭī, Abū al-Faraj al-Muqriʾ and Zayn al-Dīn al-ʿIrāqī. Kitāb al-Arbaʿīn  
fī al-jihād wa-l-mujāhidīn wa-yalīhi Kitāb al-Arbaʿīn al-ʿishāriyya. Beirut:  
Dār Ibn Ḥazm, 1995.
Wood, Graeme. The Way of the Strangers: Encounters with the Islamic State. New 
York: Random House, 2017.
Yarbrough, Luke. ‘I’ll Not Accept Aid from a Mushrik.’ In A. Delattre, M. Legendre  
and P. M. Sijpesteijn (eds), Authority and Control in the Countryside: Late Antiq-
uity and Early Islam, Continuity and Change in the Mediterranean 6th-10th  
century. Leiden: Brill, 2018. 
Zakkār, Suhayl, ed. Arbaʿat kutub fī al-jihād min aṣr al-ḥurūb al-Ṣalībiyya. 
Damascus: al-Takwīn, 2007.

 CHAPTER 4
Sufi Contributions to  
Hadith Commentary
Samer Dajani
Several studies examine Sufi contributions to Qur’anic exegesis and 
the genre of Sufi Qur’an commentaries, but there is a dearth of studies 
on Sufi contributions to the genre of hadith commentaries. In this chap-
ter I highlight some of the most important contributions to the field of 
hadith commentaries by Sufis in order to show the different qualities of 
these commentaries.1 Of course, many if not most of Sunnī Islam’s great-
est hadith commentators were themselves initiated into Sufi ṭarīqas and 
were influenced by Sufi thought, but not all of them were seen primar-
ily as Sufis, and their commentaries did not necessarily contain many Sufi 
themes. In this chapter, I look at major works by those who are strongly 
identified as Sufis, and whose works show Sufi themes as present if not 
dominant. In addition, in response to Jamal Elias’s questioning of the exis-
tence of Sufi Qur’an commentaries as a separate genre,2 my survey and 
analysis leads to the question of whether these hadith commentaries can 
be classified as a separate genre or if there is a more meaningful way to 
distinguish these works. I use two stories about a meeting – or perhaps two 
meetings – between the major hadith transmitter, Abū Dāwūd al-Sijistānī 
(d. 275/889), and the prominent Sufi figure, Sahl al-Tustarī (d. 283/896), to 
frame and direct this enquiry.
 1 A more comprehensive survey, with understandable inaccuracies due to its prelimi-
nary nature and large scope, was undertaken by Hasan Kamil Yilmaz in the introduc-
tion to his edition and Turkish translation of Qūnawī’s Sharḥ al-arbaʿīna ḥadīthan; 
see Yilmaz, Tasavvufî Hadîs Şerhleri. There is also a study by Zayn b. Muḥammad b. 
Ḥusayn al-ʿAydarūs providing examples of ishārī (metaphorical/allusory) explanations 
of hadith from the beginnings of Islam until the present; this study does not make the 
mistake of assuming that ishārī explanations are an exclusively Sufi practice and notes 
that other scholars have also used them. See al-ʿAydarūs, al-Maʿānī al-ishāriyya, 46.
 2 Elias, ‘Ṣūfī tafsīr Reconsidered’.

  
SUFI CONTRIBUTIONS TO HADITH COMMENTARY 
113
The well-known traditionist, Abū Ṭāhir al-Silafī (d. 576/1180), narrates  
two stories about the meeting between Abū Dāwūd and al-Tustarī.3 Accord-
ing to one, when al-Tustarī first met Abū Dāwūd, he asked Abū Dāwūd 
to put out his tongue, which he used to teach the words of Muḥammad, 
and al-Tustarī proceeded to kiss it, either to honour it or to receive the 
blessings and light of the hadith. According to the second story of their 
meeting, a man seeking to receive Abū Dāwūd’s great work, the Sunan, 
thought to first take the opportunity to visit the famed al-Tustarī, who was 
on the way.4 Al-Tustarī advised him that even if he received Abū Dāwūd’s 
hadith, in fact even if he became Abū Dāwūd himself, that it would not 
benefit him unless he acted on his knowledge. The man was hurt by what 
he thought was a criticism of the life of hadith transmitters, and so he 
conveyed al-Tustarī’s words to Abū Dāwūd when he saw him. Abū Dāwūd 
asked the man to take him to al-Tustarī, who only showed him the great-
est respect. During their conversation, Abū Dāwūd asked al-Tustarī about 
a hadith that was troubling him because unorthodox sects were using it 
to defend their doctrine against proto-Sunnī orthodoxy. Al-Tustarī was 
able to explain the hadith to Abū Dāwūd in a way that removed his con-
cerns and Abū Dāwūd was so grateful that he kissed al-Tustarī’s feet out 
of respect. These stories bring out two important points: (1) that the early 
Sufis were very closely connected to the hadith transmitters and the proto-
Sunnī Ahl al-Ḥadīth movement, and yet remained in some way separate, 
having identifiably different concerns, and (2) that these Sufis contributed 
to the explication of hadiths and were respected in this field. I begin with 
the first point.
Sufis and the Ahl al-Ḥadīth
It is now well known that the early Sufis were closely connected to, and 
in many cases part of, the proto-Sunnī Ahl al-Ḥadīth movement.5 How-
ever, not much has been said about the contribution of Sufis to the various 
fields of hadith sciences and transmission. Many early Sufis were impor-
tant hadith scholars in the emerging Ahl al-Ḥadīth environment. Among 
the first was Ibn Abī ʿĀṣim (d. 287/900), the ẓāhirī (i.e. textualist and anti-
rationalist) judge of Isfahan. He came from the earliest group identified as 
‘Sufis’; namely, the school of Abū Ḥātim al-ʿAṭṭār, which was based in the 
 3 Al-Silafī, Faḍāʾil Sunan Abī Dāwūd, 33–36; al-Dhahabī, Siyar, 15:213–221.
 4 This illustrates the close connections and mutual respect between those in hadith circles  
and Sufis. Among those figures from the Ahl al-Ḥadīth movement who went to study 
with Sahl al-Tustarī, the most prominent is the early leader of the Ḥanbalī school,  
Abū Muḥammad al-Barbahārī (d. 329/941), who spent some years as Sahl al-Tustarī’s 
disciple (see Böwering, The Mystical Vision, 82).
 5 Karamustafa, Sufism; Dajani, Sufis and Sharīʿa, 47–61.

 114 
SAMER DAJANI
grand mosque of Basra, and in which many of the founders of the Baghdadi 
school of Sufism were educated.6 Ibn Abī ʿĀṣim wrote more than 300 works 
of hadith, including a musnad of 40,000 hadith, and the very influential 
Kitāb al-Sunna.7 Al-Ḥākim al-Nīsābūrī (d. 405/1014), the author of the 
Mustadrak, which is one of the most important sources of hadith after the 
six canonical collections, was known to have been a disciple of at least four 
major Sufis. These included Jaʿfar al-Khuldī, al-Junayd’s successor as head 
of the Baghdad circle of Sufis, and al-Kharkūshī (d. 407/1016) the author 
of Tahdhīb al-asrār, one of the earliest extant Sufi works.8 Abū Nuʿaym 
al-Iṣfahānī (d. 438/1040) wrote Ḥilyat al-awliyāʾ, Dalāʾil al-nubuwwa and 
a mustakhraj9 on Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim among other hadith collections, and for 
fourteen years he held the distinction of having the world’s shortest chains 
of hadith and the largest number of narrations, such that traditionists trav-
elled to him from every corner of the Muslim world.10 Other Sufis became 
central figures in the transmission of canonical hadith works, among 
them, Abū Saʿīd b. al-Aʿrābī (d. 340/951), who has a key transmission of 
Abū Dāwūd’s Sunan named after him, while Abū al-Waqt al-Sijzī al-Ṣūfī  
(d. 553/1158) has a key transmission of al-Bukhārī’s Ṣaḥīḥ named after  
him and is also a central figure in the reception of Sunan al-Dārimī.11
Regarding works on hadith science and terminology, al-Ḥākim 
al-Nīsābūrī wrote Maʿrifat ʿulūm al-ḥadīth, the earliest known compre-
hensive work on hadith sciences and terminology; this was followed by 
multiple works by al-Khaṭīb al-Baghdādī (d. 463/1071) on the subject.12 
Al-Khaṭīb’s biographical entries on Sufis reveal the extent to which he 
revered them, learned from them, sought their blessings, defended them 
and even visited their graves; among those he was closest to were his 
teacher Abū Nuʿaym and his friend al-Qushayrī (d. 465/1079), author of the 
Sufi classic al-Risāla.13 Abū Nuʿaym wrote early books on hadith transmit-
ters; namely, Muʿjam al-ṣaḥāba and Tārīkh Iṣfahān. Abū ʿAbd al-Raḥmān 
al-Sulamī (d. 412/1021) travelled extensively to learn hadith and stud-
ied with al-Dāraquṭnī (d. 385/995), who was seen as the last true master 
 6 See Melchert, ‘Baṣran Origins’.
 7 See Melchert, ‘Baṣran Origins’, 234–240; al-Dhahabī, Tārīkh al-islām, 6:461.
 8 Al-Dhahabī, Siyar, 17: 163–178, 256–258.
 9 A mustakhraj is an extract or excerpt from a work in which the author seeks alternate 
chains of narration for the same hadith. 
10 Al-Dhahabī, Tadhkirat, 3:1094.
11 This work was written by Abū Muḥammad al-Dārimī (d. 255/869), an important 
teacher of al-Bukhārī and Abū ʿĪsā al-Tirmidhī. Some scholars considered his work as 
more deserving of inclusion in the hadith canon than the Sunan of Ibn Mājah, because 
Ibn Mājah’s collection was known to contain a large number of problematic traditions. 
12 On these two authors see Brown, ‘A Segment of the Genealogy’.
13 For a survey of al-Khaṭīb’s entries on Sufi figures and his relationships with Sufis, see 
Jamil, ‘Traditional Sunnī Epistemology’, 262–279.

  
SUFI CONTRIBUTIONS TO HADITH COMMENTARY 
115
of hadith criticism. Al-Sulamī left a valuable work of sūʾālāt (questions) 
recording his questions to al-Dāraquṭnī on hadith transmitters; according 
to al-Dhahabī, this reveals al-Sulamī’s mastery of the subject. Al-Sulamī 
authored works on Sufism and hadith, and acted as a Sufi guide while also 
teaching hadith for forty years.14
The story of Sahl al-Tustarī’s warning to the student seeking to 
receive Abū Dāwūd’s Sunan from its author serves to remind us that for 
Sufis, the defining quality was to prioritise worship and internal matters  
like the purification of the heart over hadith transmission and other out-
ward sciences. However, this did not mean that they did not consider 
these sciences important. While it is true that some Sufis and ascetics 
came to see hadith transmission with suspicion for the worldly prestige 
that it came to signify and for the competitiveness of hadith transmit-
ters over the shortest chains of transmission, many of them, like Ibn Abī 
ʿĀṣim, Abū Nuʿaym, Ibn al-Aʿrābī, al-Sulamī, and al-Ḥākim were able to 
strike a balance between their dedication to Sufism and their dedication 
to hadith.15
Sufis and Hadith Commentary
The first author to write a commentary on a canonical hadith collection 
was Abū Sulaymān al-Khaṭṭābī, who wrote commentaries on al-Bukhārī’s 
Ṣaḥīḥ and Abū Dāwūd’s Sunan. Prior to his contributions, there were only 
a handful of works that clarified the meanings of the vocabulary of Mālik 
b. ʿAnas’s Muwaṭṭaʾ. Al-Khaṭṭābī’s most important teacher of hadith was  
the Sufi hadith transmitter mentioned above, Abū Saʿīd b. al-Aʿrābī, author 
of Ṭabaqāt al-nussāk; al-Khaṭṭābī also studied with Jaʿfar al-Khuldī, 
head of the Baghdadi circle of Sufis in his time.16 Al-Khaṭṭābī was not the 
first to write a full-fledged book of hadith commentary; rather, the first  
full hadith commentary was written by the mystic al-Ḥakīm al-Tirmidhī 
(d. c. 298/910) who wrote Nawādir al-uṣūl, a commentary on roughly three 
hundred hadiths he chose himself.17
Al-Tirmidhī was the first mystic to provide a ‘theory or complete sys-
tem of thought’ regarding sainthood, and this is what later Sufis recognised 
14 Al-Dhahabī, Siyar, 17:247–255. See also al-Sulamī, Sūʾālāt al-Sulamī li-l-Dāraquṭnī.
15 Melchert’s ‘Early Renunciants’ gives a portrait of how ascetics and Sufis withdrew, over 
time, from the field of hadith transmission, but this picture is incomplete and neglects 
to consider many major Sufis, such as those mentioned above, who remained dedicated 
to the transmission and teaching of hadith.
16 Al-Dhahabī, Siyar, 17:23–29.
17 See al-Ḥakīm al-Tirmidhī, Nawādir al-uṣūl; the best edition is in 5-volumes, published 
in Jedda. The 4-volume edition (Beirut: Dār al-Jīl, 1992) appears to be an abridgement 
by the author himself.

 him for.18 In fact, no one before or after him, until Ibn ʿArabī, described 
such a comprehensive worldview, one that encompassed and synthesised 
metaphysics, cosmology, theology, anthropology, sainthood, mystical 
experiences, jurisprudence and language.19 Al-Tirmidhī’s Nawādir al-uṣūl 
cleverly employs around three hundred hadith as doors of entry to vari-
ous aspects of his worldview. Using the commentary on each hadith, and 
the supplementary hadiths he narrated in the commentary, he explains his 
views to the reader. Though he does not use the word Sufi in this work, 
his hadith commentary was primarily concerned with Sufi themes such 
as sainthood and inspired knowledge, knowledge of God and metaphys-
ics.20 This book was the first in several ways: it was the first full book of 
hadith commentary, the first work of hadith commentary on an original 
collection of hadith (the author’s own – earlier partial commentaries and 
most commentaries focused on the collections of previous authors), and 
it was also the first hadith commentary with a specific focus on Sufi mat-
ters.21 Al-Tirmidhī also wrote al-Manhiyyāt, a much shorter work in which 
he briefly comments on the wisdom behind eight hundred prohibitions in 
hadith, and explains that not all of these were meant to signify that these 
actions are forbidden, and therefore destructive to the self, but that many 
if not most prohibitions were to teach adab (propriety), and were intended 
to prevent people from descending to a lower level than they deserve. 
While propriety was very important to Sufis, the writings and teachings 
of al-Shāfiʿī and Ibn Ḥanbal clearly differentiate between what the sharīʿa 
prohibited in order to teach adab and what was prohibited because it 
was sinful.22
Abū Bakr al-Kalābādhī (d. 384/994) was famous for al-Taʿarruf li-mad-
hhab ahl al-taṣawwuf, his early introduction to Sufism and Sufis. His lesser-
known work is a substantial book of hadith commentary, Baḥr al-fawāʾid, 
in which he followed al-Tirmidhī’s example and chose his own collection 
of 222 hadiths to comment on. In this collection, al-Kalābādhī’s primary 
interest in Sufi themes like love and nearness to God is apparent, and in 
some cases, he interprets hadiths metaphorically, such that the outward 
meanings of hadiths refer to inward realities of the soul.23 The Ḥanbalī Sufi  
18 Radtke and O’Kane, The Concept of Sainthood, 8.
19 Radtke and O’Kane, The Concept of Sainthood, 6.
20 In al-Tirmidhī’s time, the word ‘Sufi’ had not yet gained currency throughout the  
Muslim world; it referred to particular schools in Basra and then in Baghdad; see Sviri, 
‘Ḥakīm Tirmidhī’. Later authors on Sufism, however, rightly considered al-Ḥakīm 
al-Tirmidhī one of the most influential founders of Sufism in its broader sense.
21 Al-Tirmidhī is also the author of the first known autobiography in Islam, Budū shaʾn 
al-Ḥakīm al-Tirmidhī.
22 See Dajani, Sufis and Sharīʿa, 218.
23 Al-Kalābādhī, Baḥr al-fawāʾid.
116 
SAMER DAJANI

  
SUFI CONTRIBUTIONS TO HADITH COMMENTARY 
117
Abū Manṣūr Maʿmar al-Iṣfahānī (d. 418/1027) has a similar early com-
mentary. He contributed to the by-then popular genre of forty hadiths 
and wrote a commentary on his own collection. Before him, al-Sulamī 
and al-Qushayrī had written works on forty hadiths; theirs were intended 
for Sufi aspirants, with the commentaries appearing only as headings for 
each hadith. These headings show how the hadiths demonstrated impor-
tant principles on the Sufi path. Of course, even a short heading serves an 
important commentarial purpose and should be understood as a commen-
tary, despite its brevity, and al-Bukhārī himself had pioneered the use of 
section headings to draw out the legal or theological meanings of hadith.24 
A final prominent example is Aḥmad al-Rifāʿī’s (d. 578/1182) Ḥālat ahl 
al-ḥaqīqa maʿ Allāh, which is a compilation, made by a student, of forty les-
sons given by al-Rifāʿī, each of which began with a hadith he narrated with 
his own chain back to the Prophet Muhammad.25 Though this work may 
appear at first to be a commentary on forty hadith, it is in fact a compilation 
of exhortations and lessons on the Sufi path, taking hadiths as their starting 
point. While many of these lessons focus on explaining the hadith, some do 
not interpret the hadith at all.
The above-mentioned examples – apart from al-Tirmidhī’s al- 
Manhiyyāt – should be understood for what they really were: books on 
Sufism. Some were written in the form of short hadith collections with 
headings, while others took the form of long commentaries, but here had-
ith commentaries – whether in section headings or long discussions –  
served as a medium to discuss Sufi ideas.26 Al-Manhiyyāt is more a work on 
the wisdom of the sharīʿa than it is a Sufi work or a work of hadith com-
mentary per se, though it may rely on al-Tirmidhī’s Sufi concept of spiri-
tual insight to explain the wisdom behind the hadiths. Jamal Elias pointed 
out that the structure of a Qur’an commentary, with its line-by-line format 
and the Qur’an’s changing topics and themes, was not the best way for 
a Sufi to give a detailed presentation of their ideas; rather a Sufi would 
find it much easier to set out their mystical views in a treatise where their 
ideas could be treated fully and coherently in an organised fashion without  
having to follow the Qur’an’s content and structure.27 This problem does 
not arise in hadith commentaries, in which authors could choose which 
hadiths they thought would be beneficial to their project and use them 
as doors to explain their ideas, while at the same time legitimising their  
teachings by linking them to the hadith.
24 On this topic see Blecher, Said the Prophet of God, 111–128.
25 Al-Rifāʿī, Ḥālat ahl al-ḥaqīqa.
26 For a more recent example of a book on the Sufi path that employs the medium  
of a forty-hadith commentary, see Ṣāliḥ al-Jaʿfarī’s al-Fawāʾid al-Jaʿfariyya, which I 
translated in Dajani, Reassurance for the Seeker.
27 Elias, ‘Ṣūfī tafsīr Reconsidered’, 47.

 Sunnī scholars long held that the hadiths were inspired to the Prophet 
Muhammad and constituted a sort of inspiration that complemented the 
Qur’anic revelation, thus they were almost a second revelation.28 Both the 
Qur’an and hadith employ many parables, similes and metaphors in their 
teachings, and so it was only natural for Sunnīs to take some of the Prophet 
Muhammad’s words beyond their literal meanings and give them meta-
phorical interpretations.29 Al-Kalābādhī, for example, took Muhammad’s 
supplication for health and chastity to also refer to the health of the heart 
and the importance of avoiding what God forbade. He took the hadith that 
‘only a believer remains in a state of purity’ to refer to outward purity, but 
also to refer to the purity of the heart; this, he said, is achieved by not look-
ing at anything but God.30 Abū Ḥāmid al-Ghazālī (d. 505/1111) famously 
argued that when Muhammad stated that angels do not enter houses in 
which dogs live, he wanted his Companions to understand that the light 
of God will not enter hearts that are filled with bad traits such as rancour, 
anger, envy and the like; and he explained this without nullifying the  
outward understanding of the statement.31 
Some Sufis went beyond metaphorical understandings and treated the 
hadith in the same way that they treated the Qur’an – by holding that it 
contained within it layers of meaning that were all intended at the same 
time, and were accessible to those given success by God. This is not neces-
sarily a Sufi concept, as many non-Sufis also viewed the Qur’an and had-
ith as containing immense wisdom behind their more immediate outward 
meanings. The earliest example of such a treatment of the hadith that I 
have located is that of the Ḥanbalī ʿAbdallāh al-Anṣārī’s (d. 481/1089) dis-
cussion of the ‘Hadith of Gabriel’, in which the Prophet Muhammad stated 
that ‘excellence (iḥsān) is to worship God as if you saw Him for if you do 
not see Him, verily He sees you (fa in lam takun tarāh fa-innahu yarāk)’. 
In the beginning of Manāzil al-sāʾirīn, al-Anṣārī hinted that if this hadith 
was read in a certain way it would reveal the basis for the Sufi doctrine of 
spiritual witnessing of God in the heart, a state that could be attained only 
through the annihilation of the self. Here al-Anṣārī wants the reader to 
reread the sentence (specifically that in bold above) with different punctua-
tion than usual: ‘if you cease to be, then you will see Him. And verily He 
sees you’ (fa in lam takun, tarah, fa-innahu yarāk)!32 This interpretation 
was a favourite of Muḥyī al-Dīn Ibn ʿArabī and formed the basis of his 
28 On this, see the excellent study of Graham, Divine Word.
29 Al-Ḥakīm al-Tirmidhī wrote a work on the similes in the Qur’an and hadith: al-Amthāl 
min al-Qurʾān wa-l-Sunna.
30 Al-Kalābādhī, Baḥr al-fawāʾid, 1:123–124.
31 Al-Ghazālī, Iḥyāʾ ʿulūm al-dīn, 1:181.
32 Several editions of the work and commentaries on it have been published. Al-Kūrānī 
quotes the opening section of the book in al-Kūrānī, al-Amam li-īqāẓ al-himam, 113–118.
118 
SAMER DAJANI

  
SUFI CONTRIBUTIONS TO HADITH COMMENTARY 
119
Kitāb al-Fānaʾ fī al-mushāhada. It was also favoured by a follower of Ibn 
ʿArabī named al-Kūranī who, in his work al-Amam, defended this interpre-
tation against Ibn Ḥajar’s criticism of Ibn ʿArabī’s treatise.33 
This type of interpretation of the hadith assumes that the Prophet 
intended his words to have a variety of meanings to diverse audiences at 
the same time, and that he carefully fashioned his words (or God inspired 
them) in a way that they could carry multiple meanings. This view was 
taken up and advanced by Ibn ʿArabī and his student al-Qūnawī (d. 
673/1274). In fact, al-Qūnawī wrote a ‘forty-hadith commentary’ that con-
tained twenty-nine hadiths, to prove that hadiths carry within them allu-
sions to metaphysical and spiritual realities and secrets that could only be 
accessed by the Sufis. Unlike the works of al-Tirmidhī, al-Kalābādhī, and 
al-Rifāʿī, this was not a work of Sufism through the medium of hadith com-
mentary, but was first and foremost a commentary on hadith, designed to 
show that they contain more depth than meets the eye.34 The motivation 
for such a treatment of the hadith appears to fall in line with Jamal Elias’s 
discussion behind the motives for ʿAlāʾ al-Dawla al-Simnānī’s (d. 736/1336) 
commentary on the Qur’an. Elias notes that al-Simnānī’s first intention 
was the elucidation of scripture, as he and Sufis like him genuinely believed 
that the Qur’an (and in our case the hadith) used metaphorical language 
to refer to a vast (in the case of the Qur’an, infinite) underlying body of 
knowledge. Elias remarks,
To comment on it, therefore, is not just to explain its subject but to 
publicly recognise its rhetorical excellence and therefore its beauty. 
The relationship between beauty and virtue was well established in 
Islamic aesthetics some centuries before Simnānī was born. As such, 
one can see that the writing of tafsīr for Simnānī would have been an 
act of piety as much as anything else.35
33 Though al-Anṣārī never spelled out this interpretation, Ibn ʿArabī and al-Kūrānī must 
be correct in attributing this understanding to him because nowhere does the had-
ith contain any mention of annihilation or of witnessing God except if read this way. 
Strangely, Basheer Nafi based his appraisal of al-Kūrānī as a reformer largely on the 
claim that he rejected this interpretation (see Nafi, ‘Taṣawwuf and Reform’). The chari-
table interpretation of Nafi’s claim is to assume he only read the first two sentences 
of the entire discussion, stopped at al-Kūrānī’s quotation of Ibn Ḥajar’s criticism, and 
failed to see that the remainder of the discussion was a rejoinder to Ibn Ḥajar and a 
defence of Ibn ʿArabī. For a study of how Ibn ʿArabī interpreted the hadith the same way 
he did the Qur’an see Gril, ‘Ḥadīth in the Work of Ibn ʿArabī’, 56. 
34 For this commentary see Yilmaz, Sharḥ al-arbaʿīna hadīthan, published in his Tasavvufî 
Hadîs Şerhleri. A more recent edition is al-Qūnawī, Kirk Hadis Şerhi: Sharḥ al-aḥādīth 
al-arbaʿīn. A study of some of al-Qūnawī’s commentaries in this work can be found in 
Hirtenstein, ‘The Image of Guidance’. 
35 Elias, ‘Ṣūfī tafsīr Reconsidered’, 52.

 Elias gives a second intention for al-Simnānī’s work: it was an act of 
respect for his predecessors; al-Simnānī’s work was the completion of an 
unfinished work by previous shaykhs from his ṭarīqa. While al-Qūnawī’s 
commentary was not a completion of a predecessor’s work, it was still an 
act of respect for his teachers, in that it was meant to elevate the status of 
the Sufis by showing that their piety and spiritual insight gave them a privi-
leged position from which to understand the hidden depth of the Prophet 
Muhammad’s words which non-Sufis could not access. Ultimately, it 
was his intention to elevate, honour and show particularly the prestige of 
Sufi shaykhs. Al-Qūnawī was also able, through his commentary, to link 
the words of Muhammad to the metaphysical doctrines of the Akbarian 
school of his main teacher Ibn ʿArabī; thus through his commentary he was  
serving that school.
A prime and influential example of this type of commentary is that of 
Ibn Abī Jamra (d. 699/1300) who first compiled a popular selection of 297 
hadiths from Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī and later wrote a commentary on them.36 
In this commentary, Ibn Abī Jamra sought to reveal the immense wisdom 
in the Prophet Muhammad’s words and actions, drawing out as many 
points of etiquette, wisdom, intelligence and meaning as he could from 
each choice of word, every omission and every action, all of which filled 
the hadith with meaning. In the introduction to his work, he stated that the 
sayings of Muhammad were so perfect that one needed to attribute to them 
every possible inference of meaning. Clearly, this was a pious endeavour in 
the service of the Prophet Muhammad, an effort to explain the perfection 
and beauty in his words. The difference between this work and al-Qūnawī’s 
is that in this work there are no metaphysical Akbarian interpretations. In 
fact, there are no particularly Sufi interpretations in this work, except his 
emphasis on adab, which Sufis had long seen as a cornerstone of their 
teaching. The centrality of adab was expressed in the saying ‘Sufism is all 
about propriety (ādāb); for every time there is an etiquette and for every 
station there is an etiquette’.37 The one distinctly Sufi aspect to his work can 
be seen in the connections that Ibn Abī Jamra identified between each had-
ith and a Sufi practice or belief; almost all his three hundred commentaries 
contain one or more points beginning with ‘In this hadith there is evidence 
for the people of Sufism in that . . .’
Ibn Abī Jamra’s work comes with an appendix of seventy dreams or 
visions that he or his disciples saw of the Prophet Muhammad praising 
his commentaries.38 The content of these visions demonstrates what Ibn 
36 For the original selection, see Ibn Abī Jamra, Mukhtaṣar Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī; for the com-
mentary, see Ibn Abī Jamra: Bahjat al-nufūs.
37 Al-Sulamī, Ṭabaqāt al-ṣūfiyya, 106.
38 These visions have been published independently as Ibn Abī Jamra, al-Marāʾī al-ḥisān.
120 
SAMER DAJANI

  
SUFI CONTRIBUTIONS TO HADITH COMMENTARY 
121
Abī Jamra and his disciples saw as the most important contributions of 
his commentaries; according to their view, these contributions were his 
commentaries on
1.  the hadith regarding the slander against ʿĀʾisha, which served to 
protect her honour and therefore serves Sunnī Islam as a whole; 
2.  the ‘Hadith of Ibn al-Ṣāmit’, which the author used to defend the 
Ashʿarī creed against literalist understandings of God’s attributes, 
and was described as outweighing all the books of the fuqahāʾ;
3.  the ‘Hadith of the Nightly Journey and Ascension’, which was 
praised for its explanation of the benefits of the daily prayer and 
was described as outweighing all the books of the Sufis; 
4.  the hadith that ‘this religion is an easy one’, which was seen as a 
service to the sharīʿa; and 
5.  the hadith on the beginning of revelation, which is concerned 
with the greatness of the Prophet Muhammad himself.
This list shows that Ibn Abī Jamra’s work was not oriented toward 
Sufis in particular, but rather that it aimed to cover the entire gamut of 
Sunnī teachings from creed to jurisprudence to Sufism. Furthermore, these 
visions reveal that Ibn Abī Jamra’s claim to excellence was not necessarily 
tied to inspiration or insight, as might be assumed of a Sufi, but sometimes 
related to his mastery of the Arabic language in all its pre-Islamic tribal 
dialects and variations (such as the dialects of Tamīm, Thaqīf, Ṭaī, and 
Quraysh), coupled with success (tawfīq) from God.
Al-Ḥusayn al-Ṭībī (d. 743/1342) was a direct student of the great Sufi 
master Abū Ḥafs ʿUmar al-Suhrawardī (d. 632/1234), and was one of his 
successors and a Sufi master himself. He wrote the first commentary on 
Mishkāt al-maṣābīḥ that was compiled by al-Ṭībī’s own disciple al-Khaṭīb 
al-Tabrīzī, at al-Ṭībī’s behest.39 After the student finished the work under 
al-Ṭībī’s direction, the master, al-Ṭībī, wrote the commentary. Al-Ṭībī was 
known as a Sufi, but also as a traditionist, jurist and one of the Muslim 
world’s foremost grammarians; his ḥāshiya on al-Zamakhsharī’s Qur’an 
commentary al-Kashshāf was praised by ʿAbd al-Wahhāb al-Shaʿrānī  
(d. 973/1565) as the finest ḥāshiya on that exegesis (which focuses on gram-
mar), and is still prized as such by Muslim grammarians today. Al-Shaʿrānī 
noted that al-Ṭībī was unique for mastering several fields. He wrote: ‘He 
[al-Ṭībī] was a traditionist, Sufi, grammarian, faqīh [jurist], and uṣūlī. It is 
rare for all these attributes to be combined in one scholar.’40 The Mishkāt 
al-maṣābīḥ soon became the most important hadith collection in the Indian  
39 Al-Ṭībī, Sharḥ al-Ṭībī.
40 Al-Shaʿrānī, Laṭāʾif al-minan, 85.

 subcontinent and al-Ṭībī’s commentary was the basis for its many subse-
quent commentaries. His work was also heavily used by those who com-
mented on other collections, especially Ibn Ḥajar’s commentary on Ṣaḥīḥ 
al-Bukhārī. Sufi perspectives are apparent, but not prominent, through-
out his interpretations of hadith. Nonetheless, in the next section we see 
the significance of this Sufi content. Another such commentary is that of 
the Sufi traditionist ʿAbd al-Raʾūf al-Munāwī (d. 1031/1622), the student 
of the great Sufi ʿAbd al-Wahhāb al-Shaʿrānī, and the author of two bio-
graphical compendia of Sufis. Al-Munāwī commented on al-Suyūṭī’s had-
ith compendium al-Jāmiʿ al-ṣaghīr, and often quoted Sufis like Ibn ʿArabī 
and al-Qūnawī in his commentary.
The hadith commentary al-Maknūn fī ḥaqāʾiq al-kalim al-nabawiyya 
by Rūzbihān Baqlī (d. 606/1209) stands out from the others in that he con-
ceived his work specifically as a Sufi commentary. He stated that just as 
there were works like those of al-Khaṭṭābī that explain the exterior (ẓāhir) 
meanings of the hadith, he felt a need for a work that explained its secrets 
and inner realities (ḥaqāʾiq). He wanted it to become a reference and guide 
for Sufis, to link the vocabulary in the hadith with the spiritual truths or 
realities accessed by the Knowers of God. He stated that his explanations 
were written in the language and terminology of Sufi shaykhs in order to 
point out Muhammad’s allusions to the divine realities they speak of. He 
further stated that the ability to draw these meanings from the hadith was 
possible in direct proportion to the spiritual openings that God gave His 
saints (awliyāʾ) onto the world of the unseen.41
Is There Such a Thing as a ‘Sufi’ Commentary?
In his article ‘Ṣūfī tafsīr Reconsidered’, Jamal Elias questions the accuracy 
of conceiving of Qur’an commentaries written by Sufis as constituting a 
separate genre of Sufi commentaries. He argues that these works cannot 
be conceived of as a genre of their own, because commentaries written by 
Sufis ‘lack a shared structure or identifiable set of concerns that distinguish 
them from the wider category of tafsīr literature’.42 Second, he states that 
the fact that Sufis often resort to allegorical/allusory (ishārī) interpreta-
tions of the Qur’an does not make their commentaries distinct, because 
allegorical interpretations are normal in Qur’anic commentary and are not 
only employed by Sufis. The allegorical interpretations by Sufis are often 
described as ‘esoteric’, which is not always accurate, and furthermore, the 
term esoteric could also be applied to commentaries written by philoso-
phers. Elias did note, however, that ‘there is no doubt that identifiable Sufi 
41 Baqlī, al-Maknūn.
42 Elias, ‘Ṣūfī tafsīr Reconsidered’, 45.
122 
SAMER DAJANI

  
SUFI CONTRIBUTIONS TO HADITH COMMENTARY 
123
commentaries on the Qur’an exist, both in the sense that there are Sufi 
themes apparent (even dominant) within them and they are also written by 
figures strongly and self-consciously identified as Sufis’.43 
We should also add that it is expected for an author’s background to 
influence their perspective and limit, expand or shift the scope of inter-
pretations they give to any text. Therefore, the range of interpretations 
from a scholar with mainly Sufi interests might differ from those of a lin-
guist. For example, with regard to a hadith transmitted by al-Bukhārī, that 
after a Muslim is buried he will be asked about which God he worshipped, 
which religion he followed and ‘what did you use to say about this man 
[i.e. Muḥammad]’,44 al-Kirmānī (d. 786/1384) sees this as evidence that 
Muhammad’s spirit will accompany every Muslim during the question-
ing; by contrast, this explanation does not even appear as a possible inter-
pretation in commentaries that benefited from al-Kirmānī’s text but were 
written by scholars who, like Ibn Ḥajar, were not as strongly influenced 
by Sufi thought.45
In terms of the commentaries described above, we could question the 
validity of calling these works ‘Sufi hadith commentaries’ because the 
exegetical techniques they used were not necessarily exclusive to Sufism. 
An exception to this would be Baqlī’s al-Maknūn because it was specifi-
cally written to explain every hadith using terms and concepts found only 
among Sufis. We could also refer to several passages in al-Qūnawī’s com-
mentary as Akbarian because they relate the hadith to the doctrines of  
the school of his teacher Ibn ʿArabī. Similarly, we could say that Ibn Abī 
43 Elias, ‘Ṣūfī tafsīr Reconsidered’, 45.
44 Al-Bukhārī, Ṣaḥīḥ, Kitāb al-Janāʾiz, Bāb al-mayyit yasmaʿ khafq al-niʿāl.
45 Al-Kirmānī’s commentary is the earliest of the four most well-known and influential 
commentaries on al-Bukhārī, and was regularly quoted by Ibn Ḥajar. Al-Kirmānī’s 
commentary on the Qur’an, Ḍamāʾir al-Qurʾān, has been described as a ‘Sufi commen-
tary’. While his commentary on Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī does not show an overwhelmingly 
Sufi influence, this is just a small example of how a scholar’s range of interpretations 
are influenced by their backgrounds and perspectives. A conversation between the Sufi 
scholar Yūsuf al-Dijwī (d. 1946), whose world-renowned fatwās made him the most 
prominent voice of the Sunnī Traditionalism of al-Azhar in the first half the twentieth 
century, and his disciple Ṣāliḥ al-Jaʿfarī (d. 1979), who became the Imam of al-Azhar 
and the founder of a Sufi ṭarīqa that carries his name, points to the unique nature of 
al-Kirmānī’s explanation and its appeal to Sufis. Al-Jaʿfarī relates that when he was 
studying at al-Azhar he attended al-Dijwī’s lessons of commentary on Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī. 
In one lesson, al-Dijwī commented on this same hadith – that after a Muslim is bur-
ied, he will be asked about which God he worshipped – and when the lesson finished, 
al-Jaʿfarī, who had been reading al-Kirmānī’s commentary on his own, approached his 
teacher and mentioned to him al-Kirmānī’s interpretation. Al-Dijwī said, ‘I had studied 
the commentary of al-Kirmānī and read that matter in it. Why did you not remind me of 
it during the lesson so that the people would hear it from me?’ (see Dajani, Reassurance 
for the Seeker, 26).

 Jamra’s commentary is only a ‘Sufi commentary’ in those passages in 
which he attempts to prove a Sufi doctrine or practice, while otherwise it 
is a standard commentary. Al-Ṭībī’s tendency to explain the words and 
actions of Muhammad as based largely on his intense love and long-
ing for God does not itself make it a ‘Sufi commentary’ even if al-Ṭībī’s 
taṣawwuf most probably motivated it. 
This brings us to another important consideration, namely, the idea of 
Sufi concerns and themes. While certain ideas and their associated terms, 
such as separation (farq) and its counterpart bringing together (jamʿ), and 
the related annihilation (fanāʾ) and subsistence (baqāʾ), are specifically Sufi, 
other themes that are strongly associated with Sufism, or are expected to be 
found in Sufi texts, such as experiential knowledge of God (maʿrifa), inspira-
tion (ilhām), love (maḥabba), nearness to God/saintliness (walāya/wilāya), 
purification of the heart (tazkiya) and even spiritual upbringing (tarbiya), 
are not exclusively the concern of Sufis. We should not be surprised to find 
these ideas mentioned by other Muslim authors, though we are more likely 
to find them in the works of Sufis. Furthermore, given the place of Sufism in 
Islamic societies, it was natural for Sunnī Muslims in general to view Sufis 
as experts in these fields. In fact, if one thing distinguished Sufis from others, 
it was their prioritisation of these concerns, so it was only natural for them 
to be seen as experts in these internal matters. This specialisation appears 
very early in Islam. One particularly illustrative example is the report about 
the great traditionist and jurist Sufyān al-Thawrī (d. 161/778). It was said 
that when he finished the lessons he gave when visiting Mecca, he said to 
his students, ‘Now let us get up and go to the doctor [of hearts]’,46 meaning 
the Meccan devotee Wuhayb b. al-Ward (d. 153/773). Wuhayb’s teachings 
centred on the importance of achieving knowledge of God and certainty in 
the heart and on the miraculous power of this knowledge and certainty.47
Al-Zamakhsharī’s Qur’an commentary al-Kashshāf is not labelled a 
‘grammatical commentary on the Qur’an’, because grammatical discussions 
are not its only characteristic, and grammatical analysis is present in almost 
every Qur’an commentary. But those looking for authoritative grammatical 
analysis of Qur’anic passages might see al-Kashshāf as the primary reference 
because it devotes particular attention to grammatical discussions and its 
author was seen as an authority in the field. Al-Bayḍāwī’s commentary on 
the Qur’an is not labelled simply a ‘theological/Ashʿarī’ commentary on the 
Qur’an, but those wishing for authoritative theological-Ashʿarī explanations 
of certain verses might see it as the primary reference point on the subject. 
The same could be said about al-Rāzī’s commentary regarding Islamic phi-
losophy and al-Qurṭubī’s commentary regarding jurisprudence. In the same 
46 Abū Nuʿaym, Ḥilyat al-awliyāʾ, 8:140.
47 Al-Dhahabī, Siyar, 7:198–199; Abū Nuʿaym, Ḥilyat al-awliyāʾ, 8:140–161.
124 
SAMER DAJANI

  
SUFI CONTRIBUTIONS TO HADITH COMMENTARY 
125
way, we could describe many of the hadith commentaries written by Sufis as 
being focused on metaphorical or allusory interpretations, or as emphasising 
spiritual matters more than legal or theological ones, rather than claiming 
that they employed specifically Sufi techniques of exegesis or that the themes 
they discuss are particular only to Sufis. For Muslim scholars in the tradi-
tion itself, the writings of Sufis were often deemed to be particularly helpful 
regarding certain topics in which they were seen to be authorities; the same 
could be said of hadith commentaries written by Sufis. I illustrate this point 
by briefly examining how the hadith commentaries of Sufis were employed 
and referred to in Ibn Ḥajar’s Fatḥ al-Bārī and in other important classics.
Ibn Ḥajar’s Fatḥ al-Bārī contains roughly twenty references to al-Ḥakīm 
al-Tirmidhī’s Nawādir al-uṣūl. As al-Tirmidhī was an early hadith trans-
mitter, a contemporary of the authors of the canonical collections, he was 
used as a source of unique hadith transmissions that did not exist in the 
canon. However, beside his role as hadith transmitter, al-Tirmidhī’s own 
views were quoted, most often in relation to discussions of spiritual top-
ics seen as the specialty of Sufis. To give some examples, Ibn Ḥajar quotes 
al-Tirmidhī’s discussion of the difference between two words given for the 
human heart (qalb and fuʿād); in it al-Tirmidhī states that only people of 
spiritual insight are capable of knowing this difference and of assigning 
each name to the proper spiritual faculty associated with the heart. Ibn 
Ḥajar also quoted al-Tirmidhī on topics such as dreams and issues relating 
to what the spirit experiences after death.48
Regarding al-Kalābādhī, Ibn Ḥajar quoted him roughly eleven times, 
and benefited from him more as a hadith transmitter and general scholar. 
Some of al-Kalābādhī’s hadith narrations included important details that 
were not preserved in the versions narrated in more famous collections and 
that Ibn Ḥajar found helpful in clarifying the context and legal implications 
of the hadiths.49 In two cases Ibn Ḥajar relied on al-Kalābādhī’s brilliant 
48 Al-Qurṭubī’s commentary on the Qur’an shows far greater influence from Nawādir 
al-uṣūl than from Fatḥ al-Bārī. Al-Qurṭubī quotes al-Tirmidhī more than eighty times, 
sometimes even quoting lengthy passages or entire hadith commentaries without attri-
bution (such as al-Tirmidhī’s 227th chapter in Nawādir al-uṣūl, 3:588). Ibn Qayyim 
al-Jawziyya not only quoted al-Tirmidhī more than once in Kitāb al-Rūḥ in discussions 
on the life of the spirit after death, but also copied, in an edited format, several chapters 
from al-Tirmidhī’s al-Furūq at the end of Kitāb al-Rūḥ, and added some of his own 
chapters following al-Tirmidhī’s model.
49 Note that regarding the famous hadith claiming that Muhammad was made to love 
prayer, women and perfume, the wording of the hadith that was popularised by the theo-
logian Ibn Fūrak, and even more so by Ibn ʿArabī in his Fuṣūṣ, is not found in the canoni-
cal version in al-Nasāʾī’s Sunan. Both scholars, but especially Ibn ʿArabī, made much of the 
hadith’s use of the term ‘three things’, even though this term does not exist in al-Nasāʾī’s 
version and scholars have struggled to find a source for it. However, I have found that this 
is the wording that al-Kalābādhī has in his Baḥr al-fawāʾid, 1:113 (third hadith).

 ability to reconcile seemingly contradictory hadith reports; this shows that 
al-Kalābādhī’s influence was not as a Sufi but as a scholar. However, in one 
case Ibn Ḥajar quotes al-Kalābādhī for a Sufi-influenced explanation of 
how spirits will be able to know or recognise God on the day of judgement. 
Here, like al-Tirmidhī, we see that Ibn Ḥajar found al-Kalābādhī helpful 
for his expertise in the fields of hadith and spirituality, the latter of course 
strongly associated with Sufism.
Ibn Abī Jamra wrote his commentary on a selection from Ṣaḥīḥ 
al-Bukhārī, and so it would be natural for Ibn Ḥajar to reference it, and he 
does so, more than 160 times. However, Ibn Ḥajar’s treatment of Ibn Abī 
Jamra shows very clearly that he treats him differently than he treats other 
scholars, because of the saintliness Ibn Ḥajar believed that Ibn Abī Jamra 
possessed. Whereas Ibn Ḥajar’s sources were introduced simply by their 
names, Ibn Ḥajar twice described Ibn Abī Jamra as al-qudwa (the exem-
plar) or al-imām al-qudwa, a distinction he only gave to Ibn Abī Jamra.50 
Ibn Ḥajar once followed Ibn Abī Jamra’s name with the words ‘may God 
allow us to benefit from his baraka (spiritual blessing)’; certainly it is nota-
ble that Ibn Ḥajar only used this honorific one other time, after the name 
of al-Junayd, another Sufi.51 In ten instances, after writing Ibn Abī Jamra’s 
name, Ibn Ḥajar wrote the words ‘may God benefit us through him’; by 
contrast, he only used this expression once for one other person, the saintly 
scholar al-Nawawī.52 Thus, in a markedly clear way, Ibn Ḥajar treated Ibn 
Abī Jamra differently from his other sources because of his Sufism. Ibn 
Ḥajar’s special admiration may have been enhanced by Ibn Abī Jamra’s 
reputation for closely following the Sunna, for his prestige at having a dis-
ciple like the esteemed Ibn al-Ḥājj al-Mālikī (the author of al-Madkhal, 
an acclaimed work against religious innovation), and for Ibn Abī Jamra’s 
burial in Ibn Ḥajar’s city of Cairo and the love exhibited for the author 
and his grave by the city’s inhabitants. Quite often Ibn Ḥajar described Ibn 
Abī Jamra’s unique ability to extract subtle meanings from the hadith; Ibn 
Ḥajar used words such as istinbāṭ (deduction/drawing out), ʿilla (ratio), 
ḥikma (wisdom) and ishāra (allusion), some of which could be directly 
linked to his perceived status as a man of spiritual insight. Ibn Ḥajar quoted 
Ibn Abī Jamra on matters such as spiritual experiences and the realities of 
taqwā and īmān – Ibn Abī Jamra stated that the fuqahāʾ interpret Muham-
mad’s description of ‘faith’s sweetness’ in an allegorical sense because they 
had not experienced it, whereas Sufis knew from experience that faith lit-
erally had a sweetness that could be tasted. Ibn Ḥajar also quoted Ibn Abī 
50 Ibn Ḥajar, Fatḥ al-Bārī, 1:13, 71.
51 Ibn Ḥajar, Fatḥ al-Bārī, 2:87; 11:331.
52 For Ibn Abī Jamra, see the following three examples: Ibn Ḥajar, Fatḥ al-Bārī, 2:507; 
8:480; 9:340; and Ibn Ḥajar mentions al-Nawawī in Fatḥ al-Bārī, 1:8.
126 
SAMER DAJANI

  
SUFI CONTRIBUTIONS TO HADITH COMMENTARY 
127
Jamra on other issues strongly associated with Sufism, issues such as zuhd 
(asceticism), adab (propriety), etiquette and good character. These were 
not the only elements Ibn Ḥajar quoted Ibn Abī Jamra about; on occasion 
he also benefited from his legal discussions.53
Ibn Ḥajar quotes al-Ḥusayn al-Ṭībī more than 335 times. This large 
number can be explained by the fact that al-Ṭībī commented on the entire 
Mishkāt al-maṣābīḥ, which covered the same topics as al-Bukhārī’s Ṣaḥīḥ, 
whereas previously mentioned Sufis commented on a far smaller num-
ber of traditions, ones they themselves selected as a basis for their own 
Sufi works. In the case of Ibn Abī Jamra, he commented on his own small 
selection of hadiths from Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī and wrote them for the layper-
son. Al-Ṭībī, as we have also seen, was considered a master in many fields, 
including grammar, rhetoric (balāgha), jurisprudence and hadith sciences, 
and Ibn Ḥajar made use of his expertise in all these fields. Ibn Ḥajar also 
relied on al-Ṭībī’s ability to extract ‘subtleties’ and wisdom (ḥikma) from 
the hadith. Al-Ṭībī’s interpretations of Muhammad’s words and actions 
often related them to Muhammad’s intense love for God, giving many of 
the passages that Ibn Ḥajar quotes from al-Ṭībī a distinct and easily recog-
nisable nature. Therefore, although al-Ṭībī’s commentary is considered the 
least ‘Sufi’ commentary – in that it is not an ishārī commentary, nor does 
it employ specifically Sufi terms, or deal with topics unique to the Sufis – 
al-Ṭībī’s quotes in Fatḥ al-Bārī are often those that we most immediately 
attribute to a Sufi.
The discussion above leads us back to the story of the meeting between 
Abū Dāwūd al-Sijistānī and Sahl al-Tustarī. In this story, Abū Dāwūd 
was troubled by how the Qadariyya sect employed an authentic hadith 
to support their position of complete free will. The hadith in question 
states that ‘Every newborn is born on the fiṭra (natural state), and it is his 
parents who make him a Christian or a Jew’.54 Abū Dāwūd expressed his 
concern and was troubled that the Qadariyya used this hadith as evidence 
that disbelief and disobedience to God were not predestined, but were 
brought about by humans.55 Al-Tustarī gave his own explanation of the 
hadith; namely, that children’s parents were not able to actually change  
53 Muḥammad al-Shinwānī (d. 1233/1817), who held the post of Grand Shaykh of  
al-Azhar, wrote a ḥāshiya on Ibn Abī Jamra’s commentary that is often used to teach 
it. Contemporary neo-traditionalist Sufi institutions of knowledge serving Western  
Muslims, such as SunniPath (now known as Qibla) and SeekersHub, regularly offer 
courses based on Ibn Abī Jamra’s commentary and al-Shinwānī’s ḥāshiya.
54 Abū Dāwūd, al-Sunan.
55 That this hadith troubled Abū Dāwūd is borne out by his treatment of it in his Sunan, 
870. There, he chose a longer version, via Mālik b. Anas’s Muwaṭṭaʾ, that has the fol-
lowing addition: ‘The Prophet was asked what happened to those who died when still 
young, and the Prophet replied, “God knows best what they would have done if they 

 their children’s original state of fiṭra, rather they invited them to their 
own beliefs through instruction. Ultimately, however, guidance was in the 
hands of God alone, for the Qur’an told Muhammad that he could not 
guide whomever he wishes, that only God could do that, and the had-
ith literature showed that Iblīs (Satan) was not able to misguide anyone, 
rather he could only entice people to his way. When he heard this expla-
nation, Abū Dāwūd bent down and kissed al-Tustarī’s feet. Perhaps this 
story conveys more than Abū Dāwūd’s simple gratitude and respect for 
al-Tustarī’s convincing answer: perhaps it is founded on the belief that 
al-Tustarī, the famed spiritual guide whose teachings and writings deal 
with the nature of the human spirit, was seen as especially authoritative in 
this subject relating to spiritual guidance. 
In Sunnī Islam, a division of expertise can be seen very early on; in 
this division, the explanations of Sufis can be seen as not necessarily  
having a unique method, but as having a unique authority tied to their 
perceived specialisation in certain fields related to the heart and spirit, 
and to the belief that they possessed spiritual insight. Likewise, viewing 
the tradition from outside it, we could say that it is not accurate to catego-
rise the hadith commentaries of the Sufis as falling within one particular 
genre, or we could mistakenly assume that there is something inherently 
unique to their interpretive methods. We could say, however, that just as 
certain commentaries on the Qur’an and hadith reveal the interests and 
strengths of various scholars, likewise the Qur’an and hadith commentar-
ies of Sufis reveal the interests and perspectives of each Sufi, and these 
shaped the range of their interpretations and their choices in commen-
taries that were often otherwise very different from each other in style 
and method.
had grown up”.’ Abū Dāwūd then followed the hadith with a narration about Mālik b. 
Anas being confronted with the same problem of the Qadariyya’s use of this hadith; 
according to this narration, Mālik replied that this additional phrase at the end of the 
hadith provided the response to the Qadariyya: that God knows people’s destinies. It 
is interesting that this addition was treated as suspicious by al-Bukhārī. In his Ṣaḥīḥ, 
al-Bukhārī’s custom was to always give preference to Mālik b. Anas’s narrations over all 
others, and to quote them first on any topic. However, for this hadith, Mālik’s narration 
is completely absent, and is replaced by five others that do not include the addition. 
This shows that al-Bukhārī treated this addition as a mistake. Muslim also treated this 
addition with suspicion in his own Ṣaḥīḥ; this can be inferred from his ordering of nar-
rations, where he always began with the most authentic narration of a hadith and then 
followed it with supplementary narrations that may contain anomalous additions or 
mistakes. While al-Bukhārī and Muslim chose the version of the hadith they thought 
was more authentic, it is possible that Abū Dāwūd chose this version, despite know-
ing that it was suspect, because he thought it gave some sort of response, even if not a  
completely convincing one, to the argument of the Qadariyya.
128 
SAMER DAJANI

  
SUFI CONTRIBUTIONS TO HADITH COMMENTARY 
129
Bibliography
Abū Dāwūd al-Sijistānī. al-Sunan. Cairo: Dār al-Taʾṣīl, 2018.
Abū Nuʿaym al-Iṣfahānī. Ḥilyat al-awliyāʾ wa-ṭabaqāt al-aṣfiyāʾ. 10 vols. Cairo: 
Maṭbaʾat al-Saʿāda, 1974.
al-ʿAydarūs, Zayn b. Muḥammad b. Ḥusayn. al-Maʿānī al-ishāriyya fī al-sunna al-
nabawiyya. Cairo: Dār al-Ṣāliḥ, 2015.
Baqlī, Rūzbihān. al-Maknūn fī ḥaqāʾiq al-kalim al-nabawiyya. Edited by ʿAlī Ṣadrāʾī 
Khuʾ. In Mahdī Mihrīzī and ʿAlī Ṣadrāʾī Khuʾī (eds), Mīrāth-i ḥadīth-i shīʿa, vol. 8, 
pp. 255–363. Qum: Muʾassasa-yi Farhang-i Dār al-Ḥadīth, 1381/2002.
Blecher, Joel. Said the Prophet of God: Hadith Commentary Across a Millenium. 
Oakland: University of California Press, 2018.
Böwering, Gerhard. The Mystical Vision of Existence in Early Islam. Berlin: Walter 
de Gruyter, 1980.
Brown, Jonathan. ‘A Segment of the Genealogy of Sunni Ḥadīth Criticism:  
The Mysterious Relationship Between al-Khaṭīb al-Baghdādī and al-Ḥākim 
al-Naysābūrī.’ In Maurice A. Pomerantz and Aram A. Shahin (eds), The Heri-
tage of Islamo-Arab Learning: Studies in Honour of Wadad Kadi, pp. 227–235. 
Leiden: Brill, 2016.
Dajani, Samer. Sufis and Sharīʿa: The Forgotten School of Mercy. Edinburgh: 
Edinburgh University Press, 2023.
Dajani, Samer. Reassurance for the Seeker: A Biography and Translation of Ṣāliḥ 
al-Jaʿfarī’s al-Fawāʾid al-Jaʿfariyya, a Commentary on Forty Prophetic Tradi-
tions. Louisville, KY: Fons Vitae, 2013.
al-Dhahabī, Muḥammad. Siyar aʿlām al-nubalāʾ. 25 vols. Beirut: Muʾassassat 
al-Risāla, 1985.
al-Dhahabī, Muḥammad. Tadhkirat al-ḥuffāẓ. 4 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al- 
ʿIlmiyya, 1998.
al-Dhahabī, Muḥammad. Tārīkh al-islām wa-wafayāt al-mashāhīr wa-l-aʿlām. 52 
vols. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyya, 1993.
Elias, Jamal. ‘Ṣūfī tafsīr Reconsidered: Exploring the Development of a Genre.’ 
Journal of Qur’anic Studies 12 (2010): 41–55.
Graham, William A. Divine Word and Prophetic Word in Early Islam: A Recon-
sideration of the Sources with Special Reference to the Divine Saying or Ḥadīth 
Qudsī. The Hague: Mouton, 1977.
al-Ghazālī, Abū Ḥāmid. Iḥyāʾ ʿulūm al-dīn. 10 vols. Jedda: Dār al-Minhāj, 2011.
Gril, Denis. ‘Ḥadīth in the Work of Ibn ʿArabī: The Uninterrupted Chain of Proph-
ecy.’ Journal of the Muhyiddin Ibn ʿArabī Society 50 (2011): 45–76.
al-Ḥakīm al-Tirmidhī, Muḥammad b. ʿAlī. Budū shaʾn al-Ḥakīm al-Tirmidhī. 
In al-Tirmidhī, Kitāb khatm al-awliyāʾ, edited by Othman Yaḥyā. Beirut: 
al-Maṭbaʿa al-Kāthūlīkiyya, n.d.
al-Ḥakīm al-Tirmidhī, Muḥammad b. ʿAlī. al-Furūq wa-manʿ al-tarāduf. Cairo: 
al-Nahār, 1998.
al-Ḥakīm al-Tirmidhī, Muḥammad b. ʿAlī. Nawādir al-uṣūl fī maʿrifat akhbār 
al-rasūl. 5 vols. Jedda: Dār al-Minhāj, 2015; 4 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Jīl, 1992.

 Hirtenstein, Stephen. ‘The Image of Guidance: Ṣadr al-Dīn al-Qūnawī as Ḥadīth 
Commentator.’ Journal of the Muhyiddin Ibn ʿArabī Society 49 (2011): 69–82.
Ibn Abī Jamra, Abū Muḥammad. Bahjat al-nufūs wa-taḥliyahā bi-maʿrifat mā lahā 
wa-mā ʿalayhā. 4 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Jīl, 1355.
Ibn Abī Jamra, Abū Muḥammad. al-Marāʾī al-ḥisān. Cairo: Dār Jawāmiʿ al-Kalim, 
2004.
Ibn Abī Jamra, Abū Muḥammad. Mukhtaṣar Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī. Jedda: Dār al- 
Minhāj, 2008.
Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī. Fatḥ al-Bārī. 13 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Maʿrifa, 1379.
Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya, Muḥammad. Kitāb al-Rūḥ. 2 vols. Beirut: Dār Ibn Ḥazm, 
2019.
Jamil, Khairil Husaini Bin. ‘Traditional Sunnī Epistemology in the Scholarship  
of al-Ḥāfiẓ al-Khaṭīb al-Baghdādī (463 ah/1071 ce).’ PhD dissertation, Univer-
sity of London, School of Oriental and African Studies, 2017.
al-Kalābādhī, Abū Bakr. Baḥr al-fawāʾid al-mashhūr bi-maʿānī al-akhbār. 2 vols. 
Cairo: Dār al-Salām, 2008.
Karamustafa, Ahmet T. Sufism: The Formative Period. Edinburgh: Edinburgh  
University Press, 2007.
al-Kūrānī, Ibrāhīm. al-Amam li-īqāẓ al-himam. Hyderabad: Maṭbaʿat Majlis 
Dāʾirat al-Maʿārif al-Niẓāmiyya, 1328/1910.
Melchert, Christopher. ‘Baṣran Origins of Classical Sufism.’ Der Islam 82 (2005): 
234–238.
Melchert, Christopher. ‘Early Renunciants as Ḥadīth Transmitters.’ Muslim World 
92 (2002): 221–240.
Nafi, Basheer M. ‘Taṣawwuf and Reform in Pre-Modern Islamic Culture: In 
Search of Ibrāhīm al-Kūrānī.’ Die Welt des Islams, New Series, 42, no. 3 (2002): 
307–355.
al-Qūnawī, Ṣadr al-Dīn. Kirk Hadis Şerhi: Sharḥ al-aḥādīth al-arbaʿīn. Edited  
and translated by Abdullah Aydinli. Istanbul: Marmara Üniversitesi Ilâhiyat 
Fakültesi Vakfi Yayinlari Nu. 327, 2015.
al-Qurṭubī, Abū ʿAbdallāh Muḥammad. al-Jāmiʿ li-aḥkām al-Qurʾān. 20 vols  
integrated in 10. Cairo: Dār al-Kutub al-Miṣriyya, 1964.
Radtke, Bernd and J. O’Kane. The Concept of Sainthood in Early Islamic Mysticism: 
Two Works by al-Ḥakīm al-Tirmidhī; An Annotated Translation with Introduc-
tion. Richmond: Curzon Press, 1996.
al-Rifāʿī, Aḥmad. Ḥālat ahl al-ḥaqīqa maʿ Allāh. Beirut: Dār Ṣādir, 2009.
al-Shaʿrānī, ʿAbd al-Wahhāb. Laṭāʾif al-minan wa-l-akhlāq. Damascus: Dār  
al-Taqwa, 2004.
al-Silafī, Abū Ṭāhir. Faḍāʾil Sunan Abī Dāwūd. Beirut: Dār al-Muqtabas, 2014.
al-Sulamī, Abū ʿAbd al-Raḥmān. Sūʿālāt al-Sulamī li-l-Dāraquṭnī. Edited by Saʿd 
al-Ḥumayyid and Khālid al-Jurīsī. Riyadh: N.p., 1427.
al-Sulamī, Abū ʿAbd al-Raḥmān. Ṭabaqāt al-ṣūfiyya. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al- 
ʿIlmiyya, 1998.
Sviri, Sara. ‘Ḥakīm Tirmidhī and the Malāmatī Movement in Early Sufism.’ In L. 
Lewisohn (ed.), The Heritage of Sufism, vol. 1, pp. 583–613. Oxford: Oneworld 
Publications, 1999.
130 
SAMER DAJANI

  
SUFI CONTRIBUTIONS TO HADITH COMMENTARY 
131
al-Ṭībī, Ḥusayn. Sharḥ al-Ṭībī ʿalā Mishkāt al-maṣābīḥ al-musammā bi: al-Kāshif 
ʿan ḥaqāʾiq al-sunan. 7 vols. Karachi: Idārat al-Qurʾān wa-l-ʿUlūm al-Islāmiyya, 
1435.
Yilmaz, Hasan Kamil. Kirk Hadis Şerhi: Sharḥ al-aḥādīth al-arbaʿīn. Edited  
and translated by Abdullah Aydinli. Istanbul: Marmara Üniversitesi Ilâhiyat 
Fakültesi Vakfi Yayinlari Nu. 327, 2015.
Yilmaz, Hasan Kamil. Tasavvufî Hadîs Şerhleri ve Konevînin Kirk Hadîs Şerhi. 
Istanbul: Marmara Üniversitesi Ilâhiyat Fakültesi Vakfi Yayinlari Nu. 38, 1990.

 CHAPTER 5
Ibn Rajab’s Commentary on al-Nawawī’s 
Forty Hadith: Innovation and Audience 
in the Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm wa-l-ḥikam
Mohammad Gharaibeh
Introduction
The ‘forty hadith’ genre is without doubt one of the most well-known and 
popular genres in Muslim scholarship, past and present. Hadith schol-
ars, jurists, Sufis, historians and littérateurs alike produced such countless 
collections over the course of the history of Muslim societies. The total 
number of forty hadith collections might never be fully known, although 
some have tried to establish their precise number. The printed editions  
of collections as well as those that were produced in the modern period 
are already difficult to quantify; and this is in addition to the unknown 
number of unedited collections (availability aside) that are hidden in 
manuscript collections around the world.1
The fact that there are countless forty hadith collections on a wide array 
of topics from the second/eighth century onward in almost all parts of the 
Muslim world makes the genre much more than just one of the many kinds 
of hadith-related texts. We could even say that this genre is a transdisci-
plinary vehicle to express theological opinions on specific topics and relate 
them to, and therefore legitimise them, through prophetic traditions. The 
topics of the collections are almost as numerous as the number of compila-
tions. Bartschat lists collections that seem to have no clear topic (these are 
 1 An attempt to count and list all known, available or not, was recently attempted by 
Swantje Bartschat, who drew information from manuscript catalogues and bio-biblio-
graphical dictionaries. For her impressive chronologically arranged list of collections, 
see Swantje Bartschat, Entstehung und Entwicklung, 237–333. Alavi put together a list 
of forty collections up to the time of al-Nawawī (d. 676/1233); this list appears in com-
parison to Bartschat’s study, as a ‘brief survey’. See Alavi, ‘A Brief Survey’. Sahl al-ʿŪd 
enumerated approximately five hundred such collections in published and unpublished 
volumes; see al-ʿŪd, al-Muʿīn ʿalā maʿrifat kutub al-arbaʿīn.

  
IBN RAJAB’S COMMENTARY 
133
usually entitled aḥādīth nabawiyya) and collections on, for instance, mysti-
cism (taṣawwuf), asceticism (zuhd), poverty and the poor (faqr wa-fuqarāʾ), 
the remembrance (dhikr) of God, moral life, law, societal issues, medicine, 
fear and hope, gratitude, theology and eschatology.2
Among the many collections of forty hadiths, the forty hadith collec-
tion of Abū Zakariyyā Yaḥyā al-Nawawī (d. 676/1277) is by far the most 
popular. As Jonathan Brown states, this collection is ‘one of the most widely 
read books after the Quran among Sunni Muslims’.3 Al-Nawawī compiled 
forty-two narrations on the principles of the religion, narrations that played 
and continue to play a significant role in the education of Muslims. Its sig-
nificance is reflected in the many manuscript copies and the numerous  
contemporary editions.
But ordinary people were not the only ones who studied and memorised 
the prophetic traditions in this collection and acknowledged al-Nawawī’s 
scholarly acumen in his selection of the hadith. Many scholars, past and 
present, were also interested in this collection. And although many of them  
could have compiled forty hadith collections of their own, a good number 
of scholars chose to author commentaries of al-Nawawī’s compilation. With 
about twenty-five commentaries written during the Mamlūk period and 
many more afterward,4 today’s common assumption that commentaries are 
less innovative than ‘original’ works was clearly not shared by earlier scholars.
In the present chapter, I consider commentarial literature, such as on 
al-Nawawī’s forty hadith collection, to be serious work, and as significant 
as an ‘original’ work. Commentaries should be regarded as unique and 
independent scholarly works; indeed, it is necessary to perceive them as 
more than ‘just’ supporting educational literature.5
Compiling an independent work poses several challenges for com-
mentators. They must select a topic that awakens the interest of their read-
ers, choose a style and structure that meet expectations, present a line of 
arguments that is convincing, and ultimately produce an innovative work 
worthy of a highly competitive scholarly discourse. Commentaries are a 
practical way to achieve these goals, as they relate to works that have already 
been accepted by the scholarly community.6 Therefore, commentaries give 
 2 See Bartschat, Entstehung und Entwicklung, 334–412.
 3 Brown, Hadith, 56.
 4 For a comprehensive list of commentaries on al-Nawawī’s collection, see Alavi, ‘Arbaʿīn 
al-Nawawī’, 350–353.
 5 For the assumption that commentaries were mostly a result of the educational setting  
of the madrasa, see, for example, Schoeler, ‘Text und Kommentar’, 286; Smyth, ‘Con-
troversy in a Tradition of Commentary’, 590; and Messick, The Calligraphic State, 30.
 6 Commentaries usually result from the fact that the text that is commented on already 
holds a solid place in a scholarly community. For this argument, see Jan Assmann, ‘Text 
und Kommentar’, 11 and 30.

 134 
MOHAMMAD GHARAIBEH
the author an advantage – the topic, style, structure and arguments of 
the original text have already convinced the readers, as is clear from their  
popularity. Hence, the most challenging aspect for commentators might  
be to design their commentary in a way that is perceived as innovative.
It is this aspect that I investigate further in the present chapter. The main 
case study involves the commentary of the Ḥanbalī scholar Zayn al-Dīn 
ʿAbd al-Raḥmān Ibn Rajab (d. 795/1393), who wrote a commentary on 
al-Nawawī’s forty hadith collection. His Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm wa-l-ḥikam fī sharḥ  
khamsīn ḥadīthan min jawāmiʿ al-kalim is one of the many commentaries 
from the Mamlūk period that left a recognisable trace in the scholarly dis-
course and was successfully perceived as an innovative text.7
In the following, I explore the key features of this commentary and con-
sider how Ibn Rajab attracted an audience for it. To fully grasp the extent 
of the original character of Ibn Rajab’s text I compare it to commentaries 
on al-Nawawī’s forty hadith collection by other authors and to some of Ibn 
Rajab’s other books. 
Ibn Rajab: His Life and Work
Although Ibn Rajab can be counted among the more influential Ḥanbalī 
scholars in history, little biographical information has been preserved, and 
surprisingly we still lack a secondary study on him. His writings, especially 
his biographical dictionary of Ḥanbalī scholars (al-Dhayl ʿalā Ṭabaqāt 
al-ḥanābila) and his treatise on legal maxims (al-Qawāʿid al-fiqhiyya), were 
frequently quoted by later (Ḥanbalī) scholars.8
Ibn Rajab, whose full name was Zayn al-Dīn ʿAbd al-Raḥmān b. Aḥmad 
b. ʿAbd al-Raḥmān, was born in Baghdad in 736/1335–36.9 His father, 
who educated Ibn Rajab in his youth, travelled with him from Baghdad 
to Damascus in 744/1343. At the age of eight, Ibn Rajab was introduced 
to many hadith scholars, first in Damascus and later, around 753/1352, in 
Cairo, too. He heard from Damascene scholars such as Sharaf al-Dīn b. Qāḍī 
al-Jabal (d. 771/1370),10 Aḥmad b. ʿAbd al-Hādī, Ibn Qayyim al-ḍiyāʾiyya,  
 7 Abdassamad Clarke’s relatively recent 819-page English translation of the work also 
demonstrates the book’s enduring readership for general audiences; see Ibn Rajab, The 
Compendium of Knowledge and Wisdom.
 8 Besides the entries in the two latest editions of the Encyclopaedia of Islam written by 
Makdisi (EI2) and al-Matroudi (EI3), no secondary source has addressed his biography 
to a larger extent. 
 9 Al-Matroudi, ‘Ibn Rajab’, in EI3, online: http://dx.doi.org/10.1163/1573-3912_ei3_
COM_32183 (accessed 20 February 2022).
10 His full name is Sharaf al-Dīn Abū al-ʿAbbās Aḥmad b. al-Ḥasan Ibn Qudāma al-Ḥanbalī, 
and he was known by Ibn Qāḍī al-Jabal. For his biography, see Ibn al-ʿImād, Shadharāt 
al-dhahab, 8:376–377.

  
IBN RAJAB’S COMMENTARY 
135
ʿAli b. al-Munajjā, Muḥammad b. Ismāʿīl al-Khabbāz (d. 756/1354), and 
Cairene scholars such as al-Mīdūmī, Muḥammad b. Ismāʿīl al-Ayyūbī, ʿAbd 
al-ʿAzīz b. Jamāʿa (d. 767/1365) and ʿAbd al-Raḥīm b. al-Ḥusayn al-ʿIrāqī (d. 
806/1403). During these years, Ibn Rajab also travelled back to Baghdad 
with his father; and in 748/1347 he studied for about a year, then performed 
the hajj in 749/1348, during which time he studied with scholars in Mecca 
and Medina.11
Al-Matroudi emphasises that ‘[t]he person who connected Ibn Rajab 
to the Damascene circle of Ḥanbalī ḥadīth jurists was Ibn al-Qayyim al-
Jawziyya (d. 751/1350), the renowned scholar and student of Ibn Taymiyya 
(d. 728/1328)’.12 Similarly, Anjum describes Ibn Rajab as Ibn al-Qayyim’s 
student – which he probably was to a certain extent – and as his chief 
biographer.13 Both seem to imply that Ibn al-Qayyim had a deep influence 
on Ibn Rajab. However, we might question whether this assumption or 
implication – provided this was meant – is true or how deep the influ-
ence could have been, given that Ibn Rajab was eight years old when he 
entered Damascus the first time and was clearly still under the care of his 
father, who died in 774/1372.14 Both seemed to have travelled a great deal 
and since Ibn Rajab’s teachers were the same as those of his father, it is 
more likely that his father introduced him to many scholars. When Ibn 
al-Qayyim died in 751/1350, Ibn Rajab was fifteen years old. Moreover, 
al-Matroudi writes that Ibn Rajab settled permanently in Damascus only 
after 763/1361.15
After Ibn Rajab settled in Damascus permanently, his recognition 
among the Ḥanbalī community is undeniable. When his teacher Ibn Qāḍī 
al-Jabal died in 771/1370, Ibn Rajab assumed several teaching posts pre-
viously occupied by Ḥanbalī luminaries. Besides the teaching positions 
at schools such as the Ḥanbaliyya al-Sharīfiyya (until 791/1389)16 and 
al-Turba al-ʿIzziyya al-Badrāniyya al-Ḥamziyya,17 Ibn Rajab began lead-
ing the ‘Tuesday circle’ in the Umayyad Mosque in Damascus, one of the 
most notable positions a Ḥanbalī scholar could hold.18 Since he continued  
11 Al-Ḥāfiẓ, Dār al-Ḥadīth, 85–86.
12 Al-Matroudi, ‘Ibn Rajab’.
13 Anjum, ‘Sufism without Mysticism?’, 162.
14 See the biography provided by the editors of Ibn Rajab, Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm, 1:25–52, esp. 
1:32.
15 One would have to conduct a thorough study of the writings of Ibn Rajab to evaluate 
the alleged influence of Ibn Qayyim. Unfortunately, this goes beyond the scope of the 
present chapter.
16 For the history of the school and for Ibn Rajab’s appointment, see ʿAbd al-Qādir 
al-Nuʿaymī, al-Dāris, 2:50–62.
17 See al-Nuʿaymī, al-Dāris, 2:201.
18 See al-Matroudi, ‘Ibn Rajab’.

 teaching there until his death in 795/1393, it is safe to assume that Ibn 
Rajab educated and influenced many Damascene Ḥanbalī scholars over 
the course of his career, as his biographer Ibn al-ʿImād (d. 1089/1679) 
reports on the authority of Ibn Ḥijjī.19 Ibn Rajab also taught in the Dār 
al-Ḥadīth al-Sukriyya, where he lived until his death.20
Ibn Rajab authored and compiled many books, hadith collections, 
smaller treatises (rasāʾil) and one biographical dictionary. Most of his 
works fall within four major topics or disciplines. 
The first field is Ḥanbalī law, in which Ibn Rajab had a recognisable 
influence. His book on legal principles entitled al-Qawāʿid, in which he 
evaluates the sometimes contradictory opinions of former Ḥanbalī author-
ities, was a basic text studied by many students.21
The second field is hadith studies. Here, Ibn Rajab compiled several 
small collections on various topics of devotional literature and commented 
on selected hadith, and on larger collections such as Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī, the 
ʿIlal of al-Tirmidhī and the forty hadith collection of al-Nawawī.22 Notably, 
he chose to comment on collections that were predominantly authored, 
read and studied by Shāfiʿī scholars.23
The third field was that of devotional literature and exhortation. Ibn 
Rajab seems to have been influenced in this field particularly by the 
Ḥanbalī Baghdadi scholar Abū al-Faraj ʿAbd al-Raḥmān Ibn al-Jawzī  
(d. 597/1200).24
In addition to these three fields, Ibn Rajab compiled a biographical  
dictionary of the Ḥanbalī school; this work was an appendix (dhayl) to the 
Ṭabaqāt al-ḥanābil of the Baghdadi scholar Abū al-Ḥusayn Muḥammad b. 
Abī al-Yaʿlā (d. 526/1131).
Jāmiʿ Al-ʿulūm wa-l-ḥikam
Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm wa-l-ḥikam fī sharḥ khamsīn ḥadīthan min jawāmiʿ al-kalim 
is often described as one of many commentaries on the forty hadith collec-
tion of al-Nawawī. Although, to a certain extent, this description is justified, 
and Ibn Rajab himself refers to al-Nawawī’s collection in his introduction, 
Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm can also be seen as an independent work, in which Ibn Rajab 
explains fifty prophetic traditions.
19 See Ibn al-ʿImād, Shadharāt al-dhahab, 8:580.
20 See also al-Nuʿaymī, al-Dāris, 2:60 (entry of Madrasat al-Ḥanbaliyya al-Sharīfa).
21 See al-Matroudi, ‘Ibn Rajab’.
22 See al-Matroudi, ‘Ibn Rajab’.
23 For an analysis of the ṣaḥīḥ movement, see the reception history of the Ṣaḥīḥayn and the 
process of their canonisation in Brown, The Canonization, 99–153. This is also true for 
most of the commentarial tradition of the Ṣaḥīḥayn.
24 See al-Matroudi, ‘Ibn Rajab’.
136 
MOHAMMAD GHARAIBEH

  
IBN RAJAB’S COMMENTARY 
137
When exactly Ibn Rajab authored his commentary is not clear. A 
manuscript copy of Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm in the Khuda Baksh Oriental Public 
Library in Patna, India, bears certificates of transmission (samāʿ) notes 
and a remark by the copyist that reveals some details about when and 
where Ibn Rajab might have completed or at least read and taught his 
commentary. The manuscript was copied by ʿAbd al-Qādir b. Muḥammad 
al-Ḥajjār al-Ḥanbalī in 790/1388 and presented (ʿuriḍat) to Ibn Rajab 
in several sessions. Ibn Rajab issued an ijāza for this copy on 12 Rajab 
790 (17 July 1388) in Dār al-Ḥadīth al-Sukriyya in Damascus, where he 
lived and taught.25 Even if we cannot be certain that Ibn Rajab finished 
his collection during this time – he might have finished it earlier – we can 
assume that Ibn Rajab had a primarily Ḥanbalī audience in mind. Dār 
al-Ḥadīth al-Sukriyya seems to have been built in 676/1277 after ʿUmar 
b. Muḥammad b. al-Sukrī (d. 671/1273) established an endowment for it. 
The sources mention only five scholars who had taught there previously: 
ʿAbd al-Ḥalīm b. Taymiyya (d. 682/1283), Taqī al-Dīn Aḥmad b. Taymi-
yya who also lived there, Shams al-Dīn al-Dhahabī (d. 748/1348) – though 
his appointment is not certain, Ṣadr al-Dīn Sulaymān b. ʿAbd al-Ḥakīm 
al-Bāridī al-Mālikī (d. 749/1348) and Ibn Rajab – presumably from the 
death of Ṣadr al-Dīn al-Mālikī till his own death.26 This means that three 
of the five (or four) scholars were affiliated with the Ḥanbalī school, and 
that Ibn Rajab taught and lived there for a period of about forty-five years. 
During this long period under the influence of Ibn Rajab, chances are high 
that most of the students were adherents of the Ḥanbalī school. As I show 
below, Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm seems to have been written for a mostly Ḥanbalī 
audience and the way it highlights the merits of the Ḥanbalī school sup-
ports this assumption.
To demonstrate the innovative and independent character of this work, 
I focus on a comparison with other commentaries of the forty hadith  
collection of al-Nawawī and other collections of Ibn Rajab, and I analyse 
some examples of his commentary.
Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm and the Commentarial Tradition  
of the Forty Hadith of al-Nawawī
One way to identify the characteristics of Ibn Rajab’s commentary is to 
compare it with other commentaries on al-Nawawī’s collection. Among the 
twenty-five commentaries that were written during the Mamlūk period, 
about seventeen were authored by scholars who lived before Ibn Rajab or 
were his contemporaries, and some may have written commentaries that 
25 Al-Ḥāfiẓ, Dār al-ḥadīth, 86.
26 See al-Ḥāfiẓ, Dār al-ḥadīth, 200–201; see also al-Nuʿaymī, al-Dāris, 1:56–60.

 Ibn Rajab could have studied.27 Of these seventeen works, I was able to 
consult eight for the comparison.28 These are:
1.  Shihāb al-Dīn Abū al-ʿAbbās Aḥmad b. Farḥ b. Aḥmad al-Ishbīlī 
(d. 699/1300), Sharḥ al-Arbaʿīn al-Nawawiyya.29
2.  Muḥammad b. ʿAlī b. Qahb b. Daqīq al-ʿĪd (d. 702/1302), Sharḥ 
al-Arbaʿīn ḥadīthan li-l-Nawawī.30
3.  Najm al-Dīn Sulaymān b. ʿAbd al-Qawī b. ʿAbd al-Marīn al-Ṭūfī 
al-Ḥanbalī (d. 716/1316), al-Taʿyīn fī sharḥ al-arbaʿīn.31
4.  Al-Tāj ʿUmar b. ʿAlī b. Sālim b. Ṣadāqa al-Fākihānī al-Lakhmī (d. 731/ 
1331), al-Manhaj al-mubīn fī sharḥ al-Arbaʿīn.32
5.  Zayn al-Dīn Sarīja b. Muḥammad b. Sarīja b. Aḥmad al-Malṭī 
al-Shāfiʿī (d. 788/1386), Nathr farāʾid al-murbiʿīn al-manwiyya fī 
nashr fawāʾid al-Arbaʿīn al-Nawawiyya (manuscript incomplete, 
Chester Beatty, MS 3882).33
6.  Saʿd al-Dīn Masʿūd ʿUmar al-Taftazānī (d. 793/1390), Sharḥ 
al-Taftazānī ʿalā al-aḥādīth al-Arbaʿīn al-Nawawiyya.34
7.  Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad b. Aḥmad b. Shaykh al-Yusr al-Ḥanafī  
(d. 802/1399), al-Durr al-raṣīn al-mustakhraja min baḥr al-Arbaʿīn.35
8.  Abū Ḥafṣ ʿAlī b. al-Mulaqqin al-Anṣārī (d. 804/1401), al-Muʿīn 
ʿalā tafahhum al-arbaʿīn.36
These works vary in length and the detail with which they explain the 
prophetic traditions, but they share the same structure. This is not sur-
prising, since they follow the order of al-Nawawī’s collection. Similarly, 
these works refer in their introductions – if applicable – to the collection of 
al-Nawawī as the original text. Most also refer to the forty hadith tradition, 
explain why this genre is important and cite the hadith ‘Whoever preserves 
forty hadith for my umma . . .’ in its various versions.37 For example, al-Tāj 
ʿUmar al-Fākihānī (d. 731/1331) mentions in his introduction that he also 
wanted to collect forty hadith to achieve the promise made by the hadith, 
27 For the list of commentaries on al-Nawawī’s forty-hadith collection, see Alavi, ‘Arbaʿīn 
al-Nawawī’. 
28 The rest have either not survived or exist in manuscript form but could not be consulted 
for the present study.
29 Al-Mālikī, Sharḥ al-Arbaʿīn al-nawawiyya.
30 Ibn Daqīq al-ʿĪd, Sharḥ al-Arbaʿīn ḥadīthan li-l-Nawawī.
31 Al-Ṭūfī, al-Taʿyīn fī sharḥ al-arbaʿīn.
32 Al-Fākihānī, al-Manhaj al-mubīn.
33 Al-Shāfiʿī, Nathr farāʾid al-murbiʿīn al-manwiyya.
34 Al-Taftazānī, Sharḥ al-Taftazānī.
35 Al-Ḥanafī, al-Durr al-raṣīn.
36 Ibn al-Mulaqqin al-Anṣārī, al-Muʿīn.
37 For an example, see Ibn Daqīq al-ʿĪd, Sharḥ al-arbaʿūn al-ḥadīthan, 4–5.
138 
MOHAMMAD GHARAIBEH

  
IBN RAJAB’S COMMENTARY 
139
but decided to author a commentary on al-Nawawī’s collection since it was 
the best there is.38
The strongest and most distinctive features of Ibn Rajab’s commentary 
are those that seem to be quite ordinary and self-evident. In his introduc-
tion, Ibn Rajab approaches al-Nawawī’s collection not from the viewpoint 
of the forty hadith collection; rather he refers to the concept of jawāmiʿ 
al-kalim of the Prophet Muhammad. This concept describes the prophetic 
sayings as conveying the widest meanings despite their dense expressions. 
He begins his introduction with the opening statement: ‘Indeed, God has 
sent Muḥammad with the shortest expression carrying the widest mean-
ings (jawāmiʿ al-kalim)’;39 then he lists several prophetic traditions and 
Qur’anic verses to support his statement. This difference is not just another 
way to start a commentary, or a collection of forty hadiths; in fact, it frees 
Ibn Rajab from the genre conventions of the forty hadith collections and 
opens several options for him to distinguish his commentary from others 
and to present his audience with a highly innovative work.
First, Ibn Rajab draws the reader’s attention to the topic of jawāmiʿ al-
kalim. With this, he sets his work apart from other commentaries and –  
most importantly – implies that the collection of al-Nawawī was origi-
nally intended to collect those narrations that can be subsumed under 
the category of jawāmiʿ al-kalim. Consequently, he interprets or extends 
al-Nawawī’s intention to collect hadiths that each represent a principle of 
the religion (qāʿida ʿaẓīma min qawāʿid al-dīn).
Second, Ibn Rajab mentions some scholars who have written about 
this topic.40 At this point, he introduces the most significant change of per-
spective on the forty hadith collection of al-Nawawī. Instead of placing his 
commentary among the many in the genre of the forty hadith collections, 
he places it in the context of collections and commentaries on jawāmiʿ al-
kalim. In doing this, Ibn Rajab establishes al-Nawawī in a specific tradition 
of commentators and opens the door for others to continue in the same 
line. Ibn Rajab did not perceive of al-Nawawī’s collection as originating 
from al-Nawawī’s own effort. Rather, he states that Abū ʿAmr ʿUthmān b. 
al-Ṣalāḥ (d. 643/1245) had already started a reading session for universal 
hadith (aḥādīth kulliyya) including hadith that can be seen as the core of 
the religion (madār al-islām ʿalayhā). For Ibn Rajab these hadith belong  
to the category of jawāmiʿ al-kalim, such that Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ’s twenty-six had-
iths was a collection of jawāmiʿ al-kalim, too.41
38 Al-Fākihānī, al-Manhaj al-mubīn, 30–31.
39 Ibn Rajab, Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm, 1:53.
40 Ibn Rajab, Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm, 1:55–56.
41 Ibn Rajab, Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm, 1:56. Those twenty-six hadith are mentioned by al-Ishbīlī 
al-Mālikī in his commentary on al-Nawawī’s collection of forty hadiths. See al-Ishbīlī 
al-Mālikī, Sharḥ al-Arbaʿīn al-nawawiyya, 4r–6r.

 According to Ibn Rajab, al-Nawawī took those twenty-six hadith and 
added another sixteen to complete a collection of forty-two hadiths on 
jawāmiʿ al-kalim.42 This change in perspective makes Ibn Rajab the latest 
commentator on the collections of hadith that are characterised as jawāmiʿ 
al-kalim. In the context of reshaping the forty hadith collection by choos-
ing the jawāmiʿ al-kalim, Ibn Rajab chose a title that expressed this new 
perspective and draws the reader’s attention to it: Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm wa-l-
ḥikam fī sharḥ khamsīn ḥadīthan min jawāmiʿ al-kalim (The collection of 
knowledge and wisdom: A commentary of fifty hadith of concise compre-
hensive words.)
Ibn Rajab affirms the independent character of his work in his introduc-
tion, in which he states that his intention is to occupy himself only with the 
prophetic words:
Know that I only explain and comment on the words of the Prophet 
in these universal hadiths (aḥādīth kulliyya). Therefore, I do not 
deal with the shaykh’s [al-Nawawī] remarks on the first narrator of 
the hadith, the Companions of the Prophet, nor do I address his 
[al-Nawawī’s] explanations of which sources he drew his collec-
tion from. Occasionally, I briefly mention some aspects of that [his 
explanations], since I am, as I have already stated, only interested in 
explaining the meanings of the all-embracing words of the Prophet, 
their literary, ethical, moral and juridical aspects as well as the wis-
dom behind them.43
Third, this significant change in perspective frees Ibn Rajab from the 
restrictions of the forty hadith collections. One often-quoted criticism 
of al-Nawawī’s collection was that he neglected some hadiths that were 
equally important as those he had selected; for example, the hadith 
‘Give the shares to those who are entitled to them . . .’ (alḥiqū al-farāʾiḍ 
bi-ahlihā . . .), or the hadith ‘The proof (bayyina) lies on the one who is 
making the claim . . .’ (al-bayyina ʿalā al-muddaʿī . . .).44 One could easily 
find other hadiths that al-Nawawī could or should have included that 
also fulfil the criterion of relating the principles of the religion. However, 
the challenge for al-Nawawī was to choose only forty hadiths – and in any 
case he already violated this by including forty-two hadiths. By turning 
the perspective away from a collection of forty hadiths to a collection of 
jawāmiʿ al-kalim, Ibn Rajab freed himself from this restriction; therefore, 
42 Ibn Rajab, Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm, 1:56.
43 See Ibn Rajab, Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm, 1:58.
44 See Ibn Rajab, Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm, 1:56–57. 
140 
MOHAMMAD GHARAIBEH

  
IBN RAJAB’S COMMENTARY 
141
it was easy for him to include more hadith without violating any genre 
conventions.
Hence, Ibn Rajab includes eight additional hadiths which, in his view, 
include the principles of the religion and were expressed by the Prophet in 
short expressions carrying universal meanings. The eight hadiths45 that he 
added are the following:
Hadith no. 43:  ‘Give the shares to those who are entitled to them 
. . .’ (alḥiqū al-farāʾiḍ bi-ahlihā . . .).
Hadith no. 44:  ‘What is unlawful by reason of blood relationship 
is unlawful by reason of suckling relationship’ 
(yaḥrum min al-raḍāʿ mā yaḥrum min al-nasab).
Hadith no. 45:  ‘When God declares something forbidden, He 
declares its price also forbidden’ (inna Allāh idhā 
ḥarrama shayʾan ḥarrama thamanah).
Hadith no. 46:  ‘Every intoxicant is unlawful’ (kull muskir ḥarām).
Hadith no. 47:  ‘A human being fills no worse vessel than his stom-
ach’ (mā malaʾa ādamī wiʿāʾan sharran min baṭn).
Hadith no. 48:  ‘There are four qualities which, when found in a 
person, make him a hypocrite’ (arbaʿ man kunna 
fīh kāna munāfiqan).
Hadith no. 49:  ‘If you really put your trust in God, He will provide 
for you as He provides for the birds’ (law annakum 
tawakkalūn ʿalā Allāh ḥaqq tawakkulih la-razaqa-
kum kamā yarzuqu al-ṭayr).
Hadith no. 50:  ‘Keep your tongue moist with the remembrance of 
God, most mighty and majestic’ (lā yazāl lisānuka 
raṭban min dhikr Allāh ʿazza wa-jall).
In comparison to the other commentarial works on al-Nawawī’s col-
lection of forty hadith, Ibn Rajab’s commentary is clearly different; it is 
a highly innovative and even independent work. The main feature of his 
Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm is its focus on the concept of the jawāmiʿ al-kalim. This 
focus allows Ibn Rajab to relocate his commentary into another tradition 
of collections, and this changes the entire character of it. Ultimately, Ibn 
Rajab’s work is a commentary of fifty traditions, rather than a commentary 
on al-Nawawī’s collection. Thus, Ibn Rajab’s book is an independent and 
original work that appears as the next step in the evolution of the text after 
Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ’s collection of twenty-three hadiths and al-Nawawī’s collec-
tion of forty-two hadiths.
45 These are listed by the hadith number, Ibn Rajab added those from 43 onward.

 Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm, its Commentarial Features,  
and its Relation to Ibn Rajab’s Other Writings 
I now turn to the formulation of Ibn Rajab’s commentary. I have chosen 
to analyse his comments on three hadiths to demonstrate their commen-
tarial features and the unique aspects of Ibn Rajab’s text. Besides the com-
parison to the other commentaries on al-Nawawī’s forty hadith collection, 
a comparison to Ibn Rajab’s commentary entitled Fatḥ al-Bārī on Ṣaḥīḥ 
al-Bukhārī also reveals the independent character of Ibn Rajab’s Jāmiʿ 
al-ʿulūm.
In his introduction, Ibn Rajab states that his main concern is the 
prophetic words and all their implications. In accordance with this 
statement, his commentaries are detailed and extensive, resulting in a  
two-volume print edition with more than one thousand pages.46 Hence, 
the following examples give only a very brief and select impression of  
this voluminous work.
Example 1: ‘Actions are [judged] by intentions and [a man will] 
have [only] what he intended’ (innamā al-aʿmāl bi-l-niyyāt wa- 
li-kull imriʾ mā nawā).
This hadith has a long tradition among Shāfiʿī scholars. For generations, 
throughout different eras and across the Muslim world, it was used as 
an introduction to a wide variety of hadith collections and other works. 
This tradition was probably initiated by Abū ʿAbdallāh Muḥammad b. 
Ismāʿīl al-Bukhārī (d. 256/870) who placed it at the beginning of his Jāmiʿ 
al-ṣaḥīḥ, instead of an introduction. Following him, many Shāfiʿī scholars 
chose to begin their collections with this hadith, among them, Abū Ṭāhir 
Aḥmad al-Silafī (d. 576/1180), Abū al-Qāsim ʿAlī b. ʿAsākir (d. 571/1175), 
and al-Nawawī.47
The other commentaries on the forty hadith collections address this 
hadith in relation to the following six topics.48
First, the transmission of the hadith is addressed. This hadith,  
despite its popularity, was only transmitted by one Companion of the 
Prophet, namely the second caliph ʿUmar b. al-Khaṭṭāb. After him only 
46 See Ibn Rajab, Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm.
47 For example, many Buldāniyyāt collections from the sixth/twelfth to the eighth/four-
teenth centuries begin with this hadith. See Gharaibeh, ‘The Buldāniyyāt of as-Saḫāwī’, 
81–105.
48 The following information is only an overview of a selection of the commentaries. The 
present work does not allow for a detailed presentation of the unique characteristics of 
each commentary. This overview is only meant to give an idea of what other commenta-
tors address, in order to compare them to Ibn Rajab.
142 
MOHAMMAD GHARAIBEH

  
IBN RAJAB’S COMMENTARY 
143
one individual in each generation (ʿAlqama b. Waqqāṣ al-Laythī, then 
Muḥammad b. Ibrāhīm al-Taymī) transmitted this hadith until the fourth 
generation of transmitters (Yaḥyā b. Saʿīd al-Anṣārī), after which over 250 
narrators studied and transmitted this hadith.
Second, the commentators stress the importance of this hadith and 
the fact that many scholars have stated that it should precede each action, 
speech and written work.
Third, Muḥammad b. Idrīs al-Shāfiʿī (d. 204/820), Aḥmad b. Ḥanbal 
(d. 241/855), and Abū Bakr al-Bayhaqī (d. 458/1066) are cited as having 
stated, in one form or another, that this hadith is perceived as a fundamen-
tal principle in the discipline of jurisprudence (fiqh).
Fourth, the terms of the hadith are explained linguistically and philo-
logically (particularly the Arabic particle innamā).
Fifth, the commentators consider the explanation of what has been 
left out from the sentence. Grammatically, the Arabic sentence innamā 
al-aʿmāl bi-l-niyyāt is incomplete insofar as it is not clear what the Arabic 
preposition bi- (usually translated as ‘by’) refers to. Common interpreta-
tions include an implied addition of ‘are valid’, ‘are being rewarded’ or ‘are 
judged’ according to the intention, such that the hadith could be translated 
to ‘actions are [valid/rewarded/judged] . . .’ 
Sixth, some commentators also address the issue of the ‘intention’ 
(niyya), and how it can be defined – is it a mental action or a decision taken 
in the heart, and does it require a physical expression (a pronunciation of 
the intention).49
Ibn Rajab includes all these aspects and more in his commentary. He 
does this in an extensive and detailed way (taking up approximately thirty-
five pages in the print edition); he refers to the opinions of many schol-
ars and gives examples.50 In addition, Ibn Rajab includes a section (faṣl) of 
approximately seven pages in which he elaborates on all the hadith’s legal 
implications. In this passage, his affiliation to the Ḥanbalī school becomes 
apparent. For example, he discusses several topics related to the prayer, 
fasting, ablution, and even contract and divorce law while citing Aḥmad 
b. Ḥanbal frequently, and more often than the other law schools. Clearly, 
Ibn Rajab is writing for a Ḥanbalī audience, or he intends to strengthen the 
image of the Ḥanbalī school among a more diverse audience.51
Ibn Rajab’s affiliation to the Ḥanbalī school appears to be another signif-
icant characteristic of his commentary. While this might seem self-evident, 
49 Al-Fākihānī, al-Manhaj al-mubīn, 77–95; Ibn Daqīq al-ʿĪd, Sharḥ al-Arbaʿīn ḥadīthan, 
9–12; al-Taftazānī, Sharḥ al-Taftazānī, 53–61; al-Ishbīlī al-Mālikī, Sharḥ al-Arbaʿīn  
al-nawawiyya, 1v–4r; al-Ṭūfī, al-Taʿyīn fī sharḥ al-Arbaʿīn, 25–44.
50 Ibn Rajab, Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm’, 1:59–84.
51 Ibn Rajab, Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm’, 1:85–92.

 even Najm al-Dīn al-Ṭūfī, another Ḥanbalī scholar, or Aḥmad al-Ishbīlī, 
a Mālikī scholar, do not include as many references to the authorities of  
their schools in their commentaries, nor do readers get the impression that 
they want to support their school’s opinions.
Example 2: ‘No one becomes a true believer until he likes for his 
brother what he likes for himself’ (lā yuʾminu aḥadukum ḥattā 
yuḥibbu li-akhīh mā yuḥibbu li-nafsih).
While the first example demonstrates how Ibn Rajab’s style differs in com-
parison to the other commentaries on al-Nawawī’s collection, the second 
example explores whether his style in Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm differs from that of 
his other writings. Ibn Rajab’s Fatḥ al-Bārī sharḥ Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī is suit-
able for such a comparison. Like al-Nawawī’s forty hadith collection, Ṣaḥīḥ 
al-Bukhārī was studied and commented on predominantly by Shāfiʿī schol-
ars. It was during the Mamlūk period that scholars of other schools of law, 
such as Ibn Rajab, first wrote commentaries. Moreover, some of the had-
iths that are included in the forty hadith collection are also included in 
Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī, so these hadiths enable us to compare whether Ibn Rajab 
employs different strategies and styles in these two works.
Among the fifty hadiths that Ibn Rajab included in his Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm, 
only twenty-three were also included by al-Bukhārī.52 Unfortunately, not 
all the hadiths that were included in both collections are found in Ibn 
Rajab’s Fatḥ al-Bārī. This is because, first, Ibn Rajab died before he could 
complete his commentary. He only reached the chapter on prayer, and the 
subchapter on ‘Mistakes in the prayer’ (abwāb al-sahw). Therefore, any 
hadith after no. 1,236 (according to the order of Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī) is not 
included in Fatḥ al-Bārī.
Second, the chapters that Ibn Rajab commented on have not survived 
completely. For example, the entire chapter on the ‘Beginning of the revela-
tion’ and the chapter entitled ‘The book of knowledge’ are missing; thus, 
the hadith ‘Actions are [judged] by intentions . . .’ and hadith no. 34 from 
the chapter called ‘The book of belief’ are not included in Fatḥ al-Bārī.53 
This leaves us only able to compare hadith nos. 2, 3, 6, 12 and 13 
(according to the order of hadiths in Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm). Then, since hadith 
52 In the following, the first number refers to the order of the hadith in Ibn Rajab, Jāmiʿ 
al-ʿulūm and the second to the order of the hadith in Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī: 1/1, 2/50, 
3/8, 4/2969, 5/2697, 6/52, 8/25, 9/7288, 13/13, 14/6878, 15/6018, 16/6116, 20/3483, 
26/2707, 33/4552, 37/6491, 38/6502.
53 For further information on which hadiths and chapters survived, see the introduction 
of the editors in Ibn Rajab, Fatḥ al-Bārī, 1:42–146. The editors compared eight manu-
script copies for their edition; each manuscript omits certain parts, yet the editors put 
them together in such a way that they complement each other.
144 
MOHAMMAD GHARAIBEH

  
IBN RAJAB’S COMMENTARY 
145
nos. 2 and 12 are not included in Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī with the same wording 
(they appear in different variations), we are left with hadith nos. 3, 6 and 
13. In the following, I compare Ibn Rajab’s comments on hadith no. 13 ‘No 
one of you becomes a true believer until he likes for his brother what he 
likes for himself’ in Fatḥ al-Bārī versus Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm.
In Fatḥ al-Bārī, Ibn Rajab is mainly concerned with four aspects of this 
hadith. First, he elaborates further on the wording of the Prophet. Since the 
Prophet negates the faith (lā yuʾminu aḥadukum ḥattā . . .) of someone who 
does not love for his brother what he loves for himself, Ibn Rajab questions 
the faith of this individual and explains that the Prophet meant that such a 
person’s faith is incomplete.
Second, Ibn Rajab explores the reason that causes the state of the one 
described above. He explains that envy and arrogance prevent such an 
individual from loving for others what he loves for himself.
Third, Ibn Rajab states that knowledge is the best thing that one could 
love for others and himself. He cites Ibn ʿAbbās and al-Shāfiʿī who stated 
that they loved for everyone to study and understand the revelation as 
much as they could.
Fourth, Ibn Rajab cites another hadith that seems to contradict that had-
ith in question. In the second hadith, a man addresses the Prophet, saying 
that he loves beauty and that he does not love it if someone is more beautiful 
than him. The Prophet replies that this is not a result of arrogance. Obvi-
ously, the second hadith contradicts the hadith in question, since the man 
seems not to like for his brother what he likes for himself. However, the 
Prophet did not blame this man, but rather justified his words by confirm-
ing that it did not result from arrogance. Ibn Rajab explains that the man did 
not intend to be condescending toward others, or to be arrogant. He simply 
wanted to be the most beautiful man, but in all other respects equal to oth-
ers. Therefore, this second hadith does not contradict the first one.
The entire commentary on this hadith occupies approximately two- 
and-a-half pages in the edition used for this article;54 in it, Ibn Rajab 
addresses only aspects that lead to a better understanding of the hadith  
and related issues. Interestingly, he does not refer to or cite Aḥmad b. 
Ḥanbal in his explanations. 
Ibn Rajab’s commentary on this hadith in Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm is similar; how-
ever, it is more extensive and includes more detail. It covers eight pages and 
frequently refers to Aḥmad b. Ḥanbal.55
At the beginning of his commentary in Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm, Ibn Rajab cites 
a related hadith that was narrated by Ibn Ḥanbal and that should lead  
to the correct understanding. Ibn Ḥanbal narrates the following hadith: 
54 Ibn Rajab, Fatḥ al-Bārī, 1:45–47.
55 Ibn Rajab, Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm, 1:302–310.

 ‘No servant reaches the true [or complete] faith till he likes for others the 
same good that he likes for himself.’56 Ibn Rajab then elaborates on the 
meaning of the hadith while citing many other authorities, additional had-
iths and some Qur’anic verses. In the process, he follows a similar pat-
tern as that found in Fatḥ al-Bārī. Notably, Ibn Rajab returns to Aḥmad b. 
Ḥanbal, either to cite his opinion or to include a hadith that Ibn Ḥanbal 
narrated in his Musnad.
We might conclude that Ibn Rajab drew from his commentary in Jāmiʿ 
al-ʿulūm on this hadith for Fatḥ al-Bārī, but in an abridged way. This con-
clusion is supported by the fact that he authored Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm much  
earlier than Fatḥ al-Bārī, which he began working on toward the end of  
his life. Ibn Rajab did not cite Ibn Ḥanbal in Fatḥ al-Bārī. It is true that, in 
general, Ibn Rajab cites many more authorities in Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm, but we 
cannot help but notice the dominant position he grants Ibn Ḥanbal. 
Example 3: ‘Keep your tongue moist with the remembrance of God, 
most mighty and majestic’ (lā yazālu lisānuka raṭban min dhikr 
Allāh ʿazz wa-jall).
Hadith no. 50 was the last hadith of Ibn Rajab’s completed commentary, 
the Jāmiʿ. Beyond including it because it works well as a final appeal to 
his audience, this hadith has another noteworthy characteristic. Aḥmad b. 
Ḥanbal alone narrated this hadith (with this wording) in his Musnad.57 
Al-Tirmidhī, Ibn Mājah, and Ibn Ḥibbān narrated a hadith with similar 
wording.58 With at least three other options at his disposal, Ibn Rajab’s deci-
sion to include the hadith with the wording of Ibn Ḥanbal must be seen as 
a continuation of his promotion of the Ḥanbalī school in this commentary. 
The fact that Ibn Ḥanbal is mentioned regularly in Ibn Rajab’s extensive 
explanations (the comments on this hadith span twenty-five pages)59 sup-
ports this conclusion. Even the last paragraph of his commentary is a quo-
tation from the Musnad of Ibn Ḥanbal:
In the Musnad on the authority of Ibn Masʿūd, who said: ‘The Prophet 
was given the beginnings of all good and the entirety of it (fawātiḥ 
56 Ibn Rajab, Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm, 1:302 (lā yablughu ʿabd ḥaqīqat al-īmān ḥattā yuḥibba  
li-l-nās mā yuḥibbu li-nafsih min al-khayr).
57 The wording actually includes the entire hadith, which states: atā al-nabī rajul fa-qāl yā 
rasūl Allāh inna sharāʾiʿ al-islām qad kathurat ʿalaynā fa-bāb natamassaku bih jāmiʿ qāl lā 
yazālu lisānuka raṭban min dhikr Allāh ʿazz wa-jall. Ibn Rajab, Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm, 2:510.
58 They differ most in the part fa-bāb natamassaku bih jāmiʿ. For example, other versions 
state fa-akhbirnī bi-shayʾin atashabbathu bih or something similar. See, for example, 
al-Tirmidhī, al-Jāmiʿ al-kabīr, 5:388.
59 Ibn Rajab, Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm, 2:510–535.
146 
MOHAMMAD GHARAIBEH

  
IBN RAJAB’S COMMENTARY 
147
al-khayr wa-jawāmiʿih), or the entirety of all good and its beginnings 
and endings (jawāmiʿ al-khayr wa-fawātiḥih wa-khawātimih). We 
did not know what to say in our prayer until he taught us. He said to 
us “Say greetings belong to God.”’60
This quotation can be seen as a summary of the main statement of the  
commentary, that is, that the Prophet was given jawāmiʿ al-kalim, and 
Aḥmad b. Ḥanbal stated this.
Conclusion
Ibn Rajab presents his Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm as an innovative commentary designed 
as an original work. From the title of the work, he makes it clear that his 
commentary is not ‘just’ another of many commentaries on al-Nawawī’s 
forty hadith collection. The cleverest aspect of Ibn Rajab’s commentary is 
the way he was able to use an already established and accepted template – 
that of al-Nawawī’s forty hadith collection – and present it as an indepen-
dent, original and innovative work on its own terms. To accomplish this, 
Ibn Rajab chose a narrative framework that relocates his commentary from 
the abundant commentaries on the collections of forty hadiths to the tradi-
tion of jawāmiʿ al-kalim collections. Thus, Ibn Rajab compiled a commen-
tary of the Prophet’s shortest expressions that carry the widest meanings.
Moreover, Ibn Rajab’s change in perspective also allows him to use 
al-Nawawī’s collection not as a base text to comment on, but as a template 
that can be expanded. He achieves this goal by presenting a line of authors 
(Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ and al-Nawawī) who compiled collections of jawāmiʿ al-kalim 
in steps; first, he discusses a collection of twenty-six (the commentary of 
Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ), and second a collection of forty-two (that of al-Nawawī). Ibn 
Rajab appears as the completion of this line, making his work ‘the next step’ 
in this line of collections.
Thus, Ibn Rajab freed himself from the boundaries and limitations of 
the genre conventions of the forty hadith collections, the most character-
istic one being the number forty. Ibn Rajab could easily have added eight 
other hadiths (in fact, the scholarly community was already calling for 
them to be integrated into the original collection). 
Another striking characteristic of Ibn Rajab’s commentary is the way he 
used a template that was popular among the Shāfiʿī scholarly community 
for his mainly Ḥanbalī collection (or a collection that was supported by 
Ḥanbalī scholars). In this feature, Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm differs significantly from 
the commentarial tradition of the forty hadith collection of al-Nawawī, but 
it also differs from his other writings. His Fatḥ al-Bārī, a commentary on 
60 Ibn Rajab, Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm, 2:535.

 Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī, the collection of a Shāfiʿī scholar, does not include as 
many references to Aḥmad b. Ḥanbal. Although we must emphasise that 
referring to many scholars and authorities is a characteristic feature of 
Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm, Ibn Rajab’s intention to highlight the qualities and merits of 
the Ḥanbalī school cannot be ignored.
This leads to the question of Ibn Rajab’s audience. Evidence on one 
manuscript copy establishes that Ibn Rajab read his commentary in the 
Dār al-Ḥadīth al-Sukriyya, where mostly Ḥanbalī scholars taught, and 
although it does not exclude students from other schools of law, it might 
indicate that he wrote for mostly Ḥanbalī students. Even if this were not 
the case, there is no doubt that Ibn Rajab, who taught and lived there for 
approximately forty-five years, must have had a significant impact on the 
curriculum. Thus, his Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm can be seen as an attempt to highlight 
the qualities of the Ḥanbalī school to students of other schools of law, or 
as an inter-disciplinary discourse among like-minded Ḥanbalī students. In 
any case, more studies are needed to investigate his hadith commentaries 
further and to gauge the extent of his impact.
Bibliography
Alavi, Khalid. ‘Arbaʿīn al-Nawawī and its Commentaries. An Overview.’ Islamic 
Studies 24, no. 3 (Autumn 1985): 349–356.
Alavi, Khalid. ‘A Brief Survey of Arabʿin Literature (Up to the Time of al-Nawawi).’ 
Islamic Studies 23 no. 2 (Summer 1984): 67–82.
Anjum, Ovamir. ‘Sufism without Mysticism? Ibn Qayyim al-Ǧawziyyah’s Objec-
tives in Madāriǧ al-Sālikīn.’ Oriente Moderno 90, no. 1 (2010): 161–188.
Assmann, Jan. ‘Text und Kommentar. Einführung.’ In Jan Assmann (ed.), Text und 
Kommentar, pp. 9–33. Munich: Wilhelm Fink Verlag, 1995.
Bartschat, Swantje. ‘Wer meiner Gemeinde vierzig Hadithe bewahrt . . .’ Entstehung 
und Entwicklung eines Sammlungstyps. Baden-Baden: Ergon Verlag, 2019.
Brown, Jonathan. The Canonization of al-Bukhārī and Muslim: The Formation 
and Function of the Sunnī Ḥadīth Canon. Leiden: Brill, 2007.
Brown, Jonathan. Hadith: Muhammad’s Legacy in the Medieval and Modern 
World. Oxford: Oneworld, 2009. 
al-Fākihānī al-Lakhmī, al-Tāj ʿUmar b. ʿAlī b. Sālim b. Ṣadāqa. al-Manhaj al-mubīn fī 
Sharḥ al-arbaʿīn. Edited by Abū ʿAbd al-Raḥmān and Shawkat b. Rifqī b. Shawkat. 
Riyadh: Dār al-Ṣamīʿī, 2007.
Gharaibeh, Mohammad. ‘The Buldāniyyāt of as-Saḫāwī (d. 902/1496): A Case 
Study on Knowledge Specialization and Knowledge Brokerage in the Field of 
Ḥadīṯ Collections.’ In Stephan Conermann (ed.), History and Society during 
the Mamluk Period (1250–1517): Studies of the Annemarie Schimmel Institute 
for Advanced Study II, 81–105. Göttingen: V&R, 2016.
al-Ḥāfiẓ, Muḥammad Muṭīʿ. Dār al-Ḥadīth al-Sukriyya: Suknā Shaykh al-Islām 
Taqī al-Dīn Aḥmad b. ʿAbd al-Ḥalīm Ibn Taymiyya. Beirut: Dār al-Bashāʾir 
al-Islāmiyya, 2003.
148 
MOHAMMAD GHARAIBEH

  
IBN RAJAB’S COMMENTARY 
149
al-Ḥanafī, Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad b. Aḥmad Ibn Shaykh al-Yusr. al-Durr 
al-raṣīn al-mustakhraja min baḥr al-Arbaʿīn. [Egypt]: al-Maktaba al-Azhariyya 
MS 5237 [600].
Ibn Daqīq al-ʿĪd, Muḥammad b. ʿAlī b. Qahb. Sharḥ al-Arbaʿīn ḥadīthan li-l-
Nawawī. Mecca: al-Maktaba al-Fayṣaliyya, n.d.
Ibn al-ʿImād, ʿAbd al-Ḥayy b. Aḥmad. Shadharāt al-dhahab fī akhbār man dhahab. 
Edited by ʿAbd al-Qādir al-Arnaʾūṭ and Maḥmūd al-Arnaʾūṭ. 10 vols. Damascus 
and Beirut: Dār Ibn Kathīr, 1992.
Ibn al-Mulaqqin al-Anṣārī, Abū Ḥafṣ ʿAlī. al-Muʿīn ʿalā tafahhum al-arbaʿīn. 
Edited by Abī Islām ʿAbd al-ʿĀl Musʿad. Cairo: al-Fārūq al-Ḥadītha li-l-Ṭibāʿa, 
2005.
Ibn Rajab, Zayn al-Dīn ʿAbd al-Raḥmān. The Compendium of Knowledge and Wis-
dom. Translated by Abdassamad Clarke. London: Turath Publishing, 2007.
Ibn Rajab, Zayn al-Dīn ʿAbd al-Raḥmān. Fatḥ al-Bārī sharḥ Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī. 
Edited by Maḥmūd b. Shaʿbān et al. 10 vols. Medina: Maktabat al-Ghurabāʾ 
al-Athariyya, 1996.
Ibn Rajab, Zayn al-Dīn ʿAbd al-Raḥmān. Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm wa-l-ḥikam fī sharḥ 
khamsīn ḥadīthan min jawāmiʿ al-kalim. Edited by Shuʿayb al-Arnaʾūṭ and 
Ibrāhīm Bājus. 2 vols. Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Risāla, 2002.
al-Ishbīlī al-Mālikī, Aḥmad. Sharḥ al-Arbaʿīn al-nawawiyya. [Paris]: Bibliothèque 
nationale de France, MS Arabe 747.
Makdisi, George. ‘Ibn Radjab’, in EI2, 3:933–934.
al-Matroudi, Abdul-Hakim. ‘Ibn Rajab,’ in EI3. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1163/1573–
3912_ei3_COM_32183>, accessed 5 July 2020.
Messick, Brinkley. The Calligraphic State: Textual Domination and History in a 
Muslim Society. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993.
al-Nuʿaymī, ʿAbd al-Qādir. al-Dāris fī tārīkh al-madāris. Edited by Ibrāhīm Shams 
al-Dīn. 2 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyya, 1990.
Schoeler, Gregor. ‘Text und Kommentar in der klassisch-islamischen Tradition.’ 
In Jan Assmann (ed.), Text und Kommentar, 279–292. Munich: Fink, 1995.
al-Shāfiʿī, Zayn al-Dīn Sarīja b. Muḥammad b. Sarīja b. Aḥmad al-Malṭī. Nathr 
farāʾid al-murbiʿīn al-manwiyya fī nashr fawāʾid al-Arbaʿīn al-Nawawiyya. 
[Dublin]: Chester Beatty MS 3882.
Smyth, William. ‘Controversy in a Tradition of Commentary: The Academic  
Legacy of al-Sakkākī’s Miftāḥ al-ʿulūm.’ Journal of the American Oriental  
Society 112, no. 4 (1992): 589–597.
al-Taftazānī, Saʿd al-Dīn Masʿud ʿUmar. Sharḥ al-Taftazānī ʿalā al-aḥādīth 
al-arbaʿīn al-Nawawiyya. Edited by Muḥammad Ḥasan Muḥammad Ḥasan 
Ismāʿīl. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyya, 2004.
al-Tirmidhī, Abū ʿĪsā Muḥammad. al-Jāmiʿ al-kabīr. Edited by Bashshār ʿAwwād 
Maʿrūf. 6 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Gharb al-Islāmī, 1996.
al-Ṭūfī, Najm al-Dīn Sulaymān b. ʿAbd al-Qawī. al-Taʿyīn fī sharḥ al-Arbaʿīn. Edited 
by Aḥmad Ḥājj Muḥammad ʿUthmān. Beirut: Muʾassasa al-Rayyān, 1998.
al-ʿŪd, Sahl. al-Muʿīn ʿalā maʿrifat kutub al-arbaʿīn min aḥādīth Sayyid al-Mursalīn. 
Beirut: ʿĀlam al-Kutub, 2005.

 CHAPTER 6
The Words of the Imam beyond 
Philosophy and Tradition: Shīʿī Hadith 
Commentaries in the Ṣafavid Period
Sajjad Rizvi
The neo-classicism of the Ṣafavid period (907–1135/1501–1722) empha-
sised the importance of the early hadith tradition. The intellectual context 
of Ṣafavid Isfahan encouraged the canonisation of texts and the produc-
tion of new compilations by Muḥsin Fayḍ Kāshānī (d. 1090/1679), al-Ḥurr 
al-ʿĀmilī (d. 1104/1693) and Muḥammad Bāqir al-Majlisī (d. 1111/1699), 
each with their own instrumentalisation of the words of the Imams and 
a desire to recover ‘lost’ elements of the early tradition, and each, to an 
extent, acting as a commentary on the early ‘four books’.1 Along with the 
first commentators, who confronted each other over the very nature of the 
Shīʿī tradition, the Akhbārī commentaries, with their return to scripture, 
opposed legal and theological reasoning, while philosophers and mystics 
deployed hadith to confirm and corroborate their intellectual insights and 
investigated the possibility of considering exegesis as philosophy. 
In the following study of hadith commentaries in the Ṣafavid period, I 
begin with an examination of Ṣafavid commentary traditions by analysing 
hadith compilations, ‘recoveries’, and commentaries in the period. In order 
to demonstrate the divergence and even plurality of the usage of hadith – 
usually a more important question than provenance and ‘authenticity’ –  
I then take one case study that analyses the various ways in which the notion 
of the ʿaql (intellect or reason) arising in hadith was collated in the first book 
of al-Kulaynī’s al-Kāfī. I specifically analyse the way ʿaql is understood by 
four authors: Mullā Ṣadrā (d. 1045/1636), Muḥammad Ṣāliḥ Māzandarānī 
 1 The four books of the classical Shīʿī hadith tradition are al-Kāfī of Abū Jaʿfar al-Kulaynī 
(d. 329/941), Man lā yaḥḍuruhu al-faqīh of al-Shaykh al-Ṣadūq (d. 380/991), and 
Tahdhīb al-aḥkām and al-Istibṣār fīmā ikhtulifa min al-akhbār of al-Shaykh Abū Jaʿfar 
al-Ṭūsī (d. 460/1067). For a new comprehensive study on the emergence of the notion 
of four books, see Ehteshami, ‘The Four Books of Shiʿi Hadith’.

  
THE WORDS OF THE IMAM  
151
(d. 1081/1670), Muḥammad Bāqir al-Majlisī (d. 1110/1699) and Qāḍī Saʿīd 
Qummī (d. 1107/1696). My central contention is that the philosophical 
exegesis of Mullā Ṣadrā acted as a provocation for the more exoterically 
inclined scholars who responded by trying to recover the tradition and  
preserve it from the ‘eisegetical’ gaze of the philosophers. In that sense, the 
process of writing hadith commentaries came, in part, as a response to the 
appropriation of the words of the Imams for the cause of philosophia. 
Before discussing the commentaries, we should clarify what we mean by 
the Shīʿī hadith corpus and the canonisation of Shīʿī hadith and the redac-
tion of the prophetic and imamic traditions (tadwīn al-sunna).2 According 
to our earliest sources, texts of the sayings of the Imams were redacted, 
noted and disseminated from an early period. There was no rhetoric per se 
against the written redaction of these traditions; on the contrary, reports 
promoted the written transmission of texts from the Imams.3 In the classical 
collection al-Kāfī of Abū Jaʿfar al-Kulaynī (d. 329/941), there is a chapter 
on faḍl al-ʿilm (the excellence of knowledge) on the importance of writ-
ing and recording hadiths in order to remember and disseminate them. 
One report from Imam Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq states: ‘Write, because you will not 
remember unless you write’, and in another report: ‘Preserve [knowledge] 
by writing it down because they [the people] will need it later.’4 Based on 
early bibliographical lists, it seems that texts in the early period were, in 
fact, abundant. 
The early confidants of the Imams compiled notebooks, sometimes 
called uṣūl, kutub, or jawāmiʿ, of sayings on particular issues. These cover 
the entire corpus transmitted by a particular individual or a chain, and 
these compilations led to the major compendia of the third/ninth to the 
fifth/eleventh century.5 Whether the totality of these texts constituted the 
 2 For example, al-Jalālī, Tadwīn al-sunna, and Mahdawī-Rād, Tadwīn al-ḥadīth. For a 
brief survey article in English, see Ahmad, ‘Twelver Šīʿī ḥadīṯ’.
 3 On the prohibition of redacting hadith in the early proto-Sunnī tradition, see Cook, 
‘The Opponents of Writing of Tradition’; on reports on the prohibition of recording 
hadith not signifying that hadith were widely forged, see al-Aʿẓamī, Studies in Early 
Hadith Literature, 25–28.
 4 Al-Kulaynī, al-Kāfī, Kitāb faḍl al-ʿilm, faṣl XVII, 1:129. The second hadith is found in 
the aṣl of ʿĀṣim b. Ḥumayd (fl. second/eighth century) from Muḥammad b. Muslim; see 
al-Uṣūl al-sittat ʿashar, 160.
 5 On the problem of the so-called four hundred uṣūl, and there being only around seven-
teen extant, see Kohlberg, ‘al-Uṣūl al-arbaʿumiʾa’. Al-Shaykh al-Mufīd (d. 413/1022) seems 
to be the first to have invoked the idea of the four hundred uṣūl as cited in Ibn Shahrāshūb 
(d. 588/1192), Maʿālim al-ʿulamāʾ, 3. The tradition considered the four books (or rather 
the larger compendia of the classical period) to be based on these early notebooks, a fact 
that is clear in the compilation of lists of extant works that were redacted in the Risāla of 
Abū Ghālib al-Zurārī (d. 368/978), Kitāb al-Rijāl of Ibn ʿUqda (d. 333/944), the Fihrist of 
Ibn Qūlawayh (d. 368/978), and the Kitāb al-Rijāl and the Fihrist of al-Ṭūsī (d. 460/1067).

 152 
SAJJAD RIZVI
classical compilations, starting with the homiletics of Kitāb al-Maḥāsin of 
Aḥmad b. Muḥammad al-Barqī (d. 274/888) and the theologically signifi-
cant compilation of Imamology of Baṣāʾir al-darajāt of al-Ṣaffār al-Qummī 
(d. 290/903),6 and later the four books – al-Kāfī of Abū Jaʿfar al-Kulaynī, 
Man lā yaḥḍuruhu al-Faqīh of Ibn Bābawayh al-Shaykh al-Ṣadūq (d. 
381/991), and Tahdhīb al-aḥkām fī sharḥ al-muqniʾa and al-Istibṣār fīmā 
ikhtulifa min al-akhbār of Abū Jaʿfar al-Ṭūsī (d. 460/1067) in the fourth/
tenth and fifth/eleventh centuries – is a moot point.7 Nevertheless, hadiths 
circulated and compilations were shared. But as we find in other Muslim 
confessions, the importance of hadith lay in their usage in legal and theo-
logical reasoning; the study of hadith was not an end in itself. While one 
might argue that a process of canonisation was completed with these four 
classical works, the question of why it took so long for a commentary tradi-
tion to develop around them was a feature very much of the Ṣafavid period. 
In that sense one might say that the Ṣafavids rediscovered hadith and initi-
ated the Shīʿī hadith commentary tradition in order to reflect on tradition 
to explain philosophy, theology and law, not least in the polemical context 
of the early modern period and the desire to ‘represent’ it in contrast to the 
Ottoman Sunnī tradition. 
While the manuscript traditions attest to the spread of the classical 
compilations, not least al-Kulaynī’s al-Kāfī, the revival of tradition in the 
Ṣafavid period led to an increased interest in hadith and the various dis-
ciplines associated with it. This meant there was an increase in works 
of hadith criticism and method (dirāya) – not ab initio, since works 
had been written by al-Mufīd, al-Ṭūsī, Ibn Ṭāwūs and Ibn al-Muṭahhar 
al-Ḥillī – with the texts al-Riʿāya fī ʿilm al-dirāya of al-Shahīd al-Thānī 
(d. 965/1558) and his school, including ‘al-Wajīza fī ʿilm al-dirāya’ 
 6 Aḥmad al-Barqī. Kitāb al-Maḥāsin; for a study of al-Barqī, see Vilozny, Constructing a 
Worldview. On al-Ṣaffār al-Qummī, see Amir-Moezzi, The Silent Qurʾan, 97–123.
 7 The ‘canon’ of the four books seems to be a Ṣafavid period construction. The earliest 
witness that mentions ‘the four books of hadith’ is an ijāza from al-Shahīd al-Thānī 
(II) dated 950/1543, ‘Ijāzatuhu li-l-sayyid ʿAṭāʾ Allāh’, in Rasāʾil al-Shahīd al-thānī, 
4:413. In a work dating before 960/1553, a contemporary of a student of Shahīd 
II, al-Ḥusayn b. ʿAbd al-Ṣamad al-ʿĀmilī (d. 984/1576), talks of ‘five works’, the 
four that we are discussing plus the no-longer-extant Madīnat al-ʿilm of al-Shaykh 
al-Ṣadūq – see al-ʿĀmilī, Wuṣūl al-akhyār, 85. However, we do have an interest-
ing witness in the case of Ibn Makkī al-Jizzinī (known as al-Shahīd al-Awwal [I]  
[d. 786/1385]), who mentions in his list of the ‘traditions’ the works of al-Ṣadūq, 
including Madīnat al-ʿilm, al-Kāfī, al-Faqīh, al-Istibṣār and Tahdhīb; while he 
stresses that al-Kāfī is more important than the six books of the Sunnīs – suggest-
ing its canonical status – he does not mention the notion of four or five books. See 
al-Shahīd al-awwal (I), Dhikrā al-shīʿa, 1:59. I am grateful to colleagues on the Face-
book group Shiʿi Studies: Medieval and Modern for discussions on this question of 
the canon of the four books. 

  
THE WORDS OF THE IMAM  
153
of al-Shaykh Bahāʾ al-Dīn al-ʿĀmilī (d. 1030/1621) and al-Rawāshiḥ 
al-samāwiyya of his friend Mīr Dāmād (d. 1040/1631). In addition, works 
on the narrators of hadith and on compilations (kutub) appeared just as 
commentaries began to be written. These works included Kitāb al-Rijāl 
of Sayyid Ibrāhīm Āmulī (d. 1098/1688), Jāmiʿ al-ruwāt of Muḥammad 
Ardabīlī (d. 1110/1699) and Kitāb al-Rijāl al-kabīr or Majmaʿ al-rijāl of 
ʿInāyatallāh Quhpāʾī Iṣfahānī (d. 1016/1606), which was itself a compi-
lation of the classical works in the genre. By the middle of the Ṣafavid 
period the notion of the four classical books as constitutive of the Imāmī 
tradition was well-established, and was invoked by Sayyid Nūrallāh 
Shushtarī (d. 1019/1610) in his polemic al-Ṣawārim al-muhriqa, which 
was probably penned around 1000/1600.8 
The Ṣafavid Commentary Tradition
The Ṣafavids undertook a major project of recovering texts and dissemi-
nating those compilations that they considered to be canonical; that is, 
the works of the Imams themselves, especially the collections of suppli-
cations entitled al-Ṣaḥīfa al-sajjādiyya by Imam Zayn al-ʿĀbidīn and the 
sermons and letters of ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib in Nahj al-balāgha. In order to 
understand the commentary tradition on hadith in this period, I pres-
ent four types of works in the context of how al-Majlisī understood the 
tradition. First, I discuss the works attributed to the Imams themselves 
that were disseminated in this period and comment briefly on the major 
commentaries on them. Second, I briefly mention the hadith element of 
al-Majlisī’s conception of the Imāmī tradition. Third, I consider those 
works that were popularly glossed in the period. Finally, I look at the 
encyclopaedic works encompassing hadith that were produced during 
this period. 
The Works Attributed to the Imams
Among the works attributed to the Imams as constituting the tradition, 
al-Majlisī mentions Nahj al-balāgha, the sermons, letters and sayings of 
ʿAlī compiled by al-Sharīf al-Raḍī (d. 406/1015).9 This work was widely 
attested in the pre-Ṣafavid period and cannot be considered a Ṣafavid 
‘recovery’ or ‘rediscovery’.10 It is the only major text among the Ṣafavid 
 8 Shushtarī, al-Ṣawārim al-muhriqa, 213; al-ʿĀmilī, ‘Wajīza fī ʿilm al-dirāya’;  al-Ardabīlī, 
Jāmiʿ al-ruwāt.
 9 Al-Majlisī, Biḥār al-anwār, 1:11.
10 For an indication of extant manuscript copies of various texts in this study, I refer to 
Dinā. In Iran, there are 377 extant copies of the Nahj of which over half are pre-Ṣafavid. 
See Dirāyatī (ed.), Dinā, 10:884–896.x

 ‘canon’ of hadith that had been commented on – the most famous ones 
being the narrative commentary of Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd (d. 656/1258), and 
the three commentaries of Maytham al-Baḥrānī (d. c. 699/1300).11 Codi-
ces of the Nahj al-balāgha proliferated in the Ṣafavid period. There were 
at least four known translations of it: two from the early Ṣafavid period 
by philosophers from Shiraz, Ḥusayn Ilāhī Ardabīlī (d. c. 950/1543) and 
Jamāl al-Dīn Maḥmūd Shīrāzī (d. c. 957/1550), and two from the later 
tenth/sixteenth century, Tanbīh al-ghāfilīn wa-tadhkirat al-ʿārifīn of 
Fatḥallāh Kāshānī (d. 977/1571), the famous Qur’anic exegete, and ʿAlī b. 
al-Ḥasan Zavārī Iṣfahānī, whose Rawḍat al-abrār is dated c. 956/1549.12 
The Nahj al-balāgha was popular, especially among philosophers of 
the period who demonstrated their understanding of scripture and the 
words of the Imam as the font of ḥikma. This already figured in the 
(pre-Ṣafavid) work of Ibn Abī Jumhūr al-Aḥsāʾī (d. after 906/1501) espe-
cially in his Mujlī mirʾāt al-munjī, in which he refers to ʿAlī as ‘lord of 
the philosophers’ (raʾīs al-ḥukamāʾ) and quotes from Nahj al-balāgha.13 
Commentaries on the text in the Ṣafavid period included short lexical 
glosses as well as philosophical summa, as in the case of Anwār al-faṣāḥa 
wa-asrār al-barāʾa fī sharḥ Nahj al-balāgha of Niẓām al-Dīn Gīlānī  
(d. after 1072/1662).14
Regarding the Dīwān attributed to ʿAlī, al-Majlisī says that most of the 
verses are well corroborated in other sources and that Ibn Shahrāshūb  
(d. 588/1192) was convinced of its attribution.15 The Dīwān seems to have 
been a Ṣafavid rediscovery – although on the cusp of the tenth/sixteenth 
century, two figures cite it extensively: Ibn Abī Jumhūr and Mīr Ḥusayn 
Maybudī (d. 909/1504), the Tīmūrid philosopher who wrote an extensive 
commentary and considered it a font of wisdom. Maybudī’s commen-
tary on the Dīwān was completed in 890/1485.16 Ibn Abī Jumhūr cites the 
famous verses on the human as a microcosm that seemed to be popular in 
Ṣafavid literature and beyond.17 A popular old saying associated with this 
was attributed to ʿAlī: ‘I am the dot under the bāʾ’; this was understood to 
11 See the bibliography for information on printed editions of Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd’s  
Sharḥ Nahj al-balāgha and al-Baḥrānī’s Sharḥ Nahj al-balāgha and ʿAwālim al-ʿulūm 
wa-l-maʿārif.
12 Dirāyatī (ed.), Dinā, 10:896–897; 3:355–356; 5:966 (Rawḍat al-abrār is extant in MS 
Marʿashī Qum 8838).
13 Ibn Abī Jumhūr, Mujlī, 2:545.
14 MS Malik (Tehran) 1343 – see the discussion in Bandy, ‘Beyond a Mountain of Light’, 
376–408.
15 Al-Majlisī, Biḥār al-anwār, 1:22, 42.
16 All the extant codices in Iran are Ṣafavid – see Dirāyatī (ed.), Dinā, 5:49–50.
17 Ibn Abī Jumhūr, Mujlī, 1:439; 4:1505.
154 
SAJJAD RIZVI

  
THE WORDS OF THE IMAM  
155
be part of an explanation of the role of the Imam as the ‘perfect human’ 
(insān kāmil).18 Mullā Ṣadrā has an extensive discussion of the hadith of 
the dot in al-Asfār al-arbaʿa in the context of the meaning of God’s attribute 
of speech.19 
Next, we have works attributed to Imam Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq, such as 
al-Tawḥīd, Kanz al-ḥaqāʾiq wa-l-maʿārif, al-Ihlīlijā fī al-tawḥīd (transmit-
ted by al-Mufaḍḍal b. ʿUmar (d. 180/796)), Miṣbāh al-sharīʿa wa-miftāḥ 
al-ḥaqīqa and the tafsīr of Imam al-Ṣādiq narrated from ʿAlī.20 For the 
authenticity of most of these texts al-Majlisī relies on the testimony of Sayyid 
Raḍī al-Dīn ʿAlī Ibn Ṭāwūs (d. 664/1266) – the exception is the Miṣbāḥ, 
which he thinks reads too much like a Sufi text.21 The texts transmitted 
by al-Mufaḍḍal were certainly Ṣafavid rediscoveries, were well attested in 
the manuscript tradition of the period and are quoted in their entirety in 
the first volume on tawḥīd in Biḥār al-anwār.22 The Miṣbāḥ is even bet-
ter attested but circulated mainly among the more mystically inclined.23 
The tafsīr is only extant in South Asia, so al-Majlisī’s comments on it are 
unusual.24 Al-Ihlīlijā presents a teleological argument (an argument from 
design) for the existence of God and refutes naturalists and those who deny 
a creator.25 Al-Tawḥīd purports to being a record of five sittings (majālis) 
during which Imam al-Ṣādiq responded to the doubts of the naturalist (or 
possibly dualist) Ibn Abī al-ʿAwjāʾ (d. 155/772) through arguments from 
design for the existence of God based on the order of the cosmos, the struc-
ture of human beings, and other elements of the natural world.
The works attributed to Imam al-Riḍā include al-Ṣaḥīfa, al-Ṭibb 
(or al-Risāla al-dhahabiyya written for al-Maʾmūn) and Fiqh al-riḍā.26 
Al-Majlisī was satisfied with the authenticity of these texts, and claimed 
18 Ibn Abī Jumhūr, Mujlī, 4:1503. For a discussion of this ‘hadith’, see Dīmagār-Gurāb, 
‘Rivāyat-i Anā al-nuqṭa’.
19 Shīrāzī, al-Ḥikma al-mutaʿāliya, 7:43–46.
20 Al-Ṣādiq, Kitāb al-Ihlīlijā; Al-Ṣādiq, Kitāb al-Tawḥīd. Both texts are cited in their 
entirety in al-Majlisī, Biḥār al-anwār, 3:57–151, 152–198. On these texts, see Asatryan, 
Controversies in Formative Shiʿi Islam, 59–60.
21 Al-Majlisī, Biḥār al-anwār, 1:14–15, 32; Ibn Ṭāwūs, Kashf al-muḥajja, 50–51.
22 Dirāyatī (ed.), Dinā, 2:291–292 (46 copies are all from the Ṣafavid period or later), 
3:384–388 (125 copies start from the Ṣafavid period). 
23 Dirāyatī (ed.), Dinā, 9:656–663 (239 copies are from the Ṣafavid period, with only one 
attested before that).
24 The narrator of this commentary is Sayyid Abū al-Faḍl al-ʿAbbās b. Muḥammad b. 
al-Qāsim b. Ḥamza b. Mūsā b. Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq, who is also the narrator of the famous 
Tafsīr of ʿAlī b. Ibrāhīm al-Qummī. 
25 For a study of the complicated historical recensions of this text in the late antique  
context, see El-Shamsy, ‘Al-Ghazālī’s Teleology’.
26 Al-Majlisī, Biḥār al-anwār, 1:11; al-Riḍā, Ṣaḥīfat al-Riḍā.

 that much of their content corresponds with what was narrated by 
al-Ṣadūq. These texts were rediscovered and popularised in the Ṣafavid 
period; barely a handful of manuscript witnesses before then are extant. 
The prophetic medical texts were linked to the revival of the genre in 
this period.27 The Fiqh enjoyed a certain vogue as well, especially among 
more hadith-inclined jurists. It was first popularised and authenticated 
by the elder al-Majlisī.28 The Ṣaḥīfa exemplified the revival of all clas-
sical hadith-related matters in the period.29 Al-Risāla al-dhahabiyya 
was copied in its entirety by al-Majlisī as chapter 89 of volume 14 
(al-Samāʾ wa-l-ʿālam) of the Biḥār al-anwār; the Risāla was based on a 
recension of ʿAlī al-Karakī (d. 940/1534) and its popularity owes much 
to al-Majlisī.30 
The tafsīr attributed to Imam al-Ḥasan al-ʿAskarī, entitled al-Tafsīr 
al-mansūb, was fairly well attested in pre-Ṣafavid manuscripts, but was 
popularised in the Ṣafavid period.31 Although the chain of transmission 
mentions al-Shaykh al-Ṣadūq, al-Majlisī transmits it from Abū al-Ḥusayn 
Muḥammad b. al-Qāsim, who was known as al-mufassir al-Astarābādī 
al-Jurjānī and was keen to deflect any suggestion that the text is Zaydī 
‘because most of the people of Astarābād are Zaydī’.32 Al-Tafsīr al-mansūb 
became popular along with the works of al-Ṣadūq in the middle of the 
Ṣafavid period and was an important source for reports on the maximalist 
concept of the Imam. Al-Majlisī’s trust in the reliability of the attribution 
seems to be based on the judgement of his father.33
The one text that al-Majlisī does not mention that was popularised in 
the Ṣafavid period is al-Ṣaḥīfa al-sajjādiyya, a collection of supplications 
narrated from Imam ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn Zayn al-ʿĀbidīn. He probably did 
not mention it because it was not, strictly speaking, a work of hadith. There 
were three recensions of the text in the Ṣafavid period: the first redac-
tion was by Shaykh Bahāʾ al-Dīn al-ʿĀmilī (d. 1030/1621), the second by  
al-Ḥurr al-ʿĀmilī (d. 1104/1693) and the third by Mīrzā ʿAbdallāh Afandī 
27 Dirāyatī (ed.), Dinā, 1:1079–1080 (58 copies), 5:791–795 (137 copies, of which only 3 
are pre-Ṣafavid).
28 Dirāyatī (ed.), Dinā, 7:1079–1080 (26 copies, of which only one is pre-Ṣafavid). See 
Qāsimī, Muḥaqqiq-i Majlisī, 1:398–401.
29 Dirāyatī (ed.), Dinā, 7:59–63 (115 copies). 
30 Al-Majlisī, Biḥār al-anwār, 59:306–356; for a study, see Newman, ‘Bāqir al-Majlisī and 
Islamicate Medicine II’.
31 Dirāyatī (ed.), Dinā, 2:122–124 (94 copies, of which half are pre-Ṣafavid).
32 Al-Ḥasan al-ʿAskarī, al-Tafsīr al-mansūb, 23–24. For a study of the text and its dating to 
the fourth/tenth century, see Bar-Asher, ‘The Qurʾān Commentary’; al-Ṣadūq cites the 
tafsīr in his works; see al-Ṣadūq, ʿIlal al-sharāʾiʿ, 1:298, and al-Ṣadūq, Maʿānī al-akhbār, 
4 (on the basmala), 287–289 (on the meaning of death). 
33 Qāsimī, Muḥaqqiq-i Majlisī, 1:401–403.
156 
SAJJAD RIZVI

  
THE WORDS OF THE IMAM  
157
(d. c. 1130/1718).34 There is an eleventh-/seventeenth-century Persian 
translation by a Muḥammad b. ʿAlī Daylamī attested in a unicum.35 The 
earliest commentary, on the cusp of the Ṣafavid period, seems to be by the 
ʿĀmilī scholar Taqī al-Dīn Ibrāhīm al-Kafʿamī (d. 905/1499), extant in a 
unicum.36 Apart from the many manuscript copies, there are a number 
of published commentaries on the text from the Ṣafavid period, such as a 
collection of eleventh-/seventeenth-century glosses by Muḥammad Taqī 
al-Majlisī (d. 1070/1659),37 Shāh Muḥammad Dārābī Shīrāzī (d. 1130/ 
1718),38 Ibn Khātūn al-ʿĀmilī (d. 1059/1649), Ḥusayn Khwānsārī (d. 1098/ 
1687)39 and Mīr Dāmād. In addition, we know of Nūr al-anwār fī sharḥ 
al-Ṣaḥīfa al-sajjādiyya of Sayyid Niʿmatallāh al-Jazāʾirī (d. 1102/1701) 
and Riyāḍ al-sālikīn fī sharḥ Ṣaḥīfat Sayyid al-Sājidīn of Sayyid ʿAlī Khān 
Madanī Shīrāzī (d. 1119/1707).
The Imāmī Tradition According to al-Majlisī 
The Ṣafavids also sought to recover early texts that exemplified their ‘maxi-
malist’ notion of the Imams; they promoted the pre-Ṣafavid collection 
ʿAwālī (or Ghawālī) al-laʾālī of Ibn Abī Jumhūr al-Aḥsāʾī,40 Mashāriq anwār 
al-yaqīn of Rajab al-Bursī,41 Muntakhab baṣāʾir al-darajāt of al-Ḥasan 
al-Ḥillī42 and other texts that became the core of the Biḥār al-anwār of 
al-Majlisī, such as Baṣāʾir al-darajāt of al-Ṣaffār al-Qummī43 – in fact in 
his introduction to the Biḥār, he lists a series of noteworthy works that 
34 The first is best attested in the manuscript collections – and in published versions. 
See Dirāyatī (ed.), Dinā, 7:70–101 (1,278 copies, including 14 valuable and early pre-
Ṣafavid ones). For the second redaction, see Dirāyatī (ed.), Dinā, 7:63 (11 copies), and 
for the third, see Dirāyatī (ed.), Dinā, 7:63 (5 copies). 
35 See Dirāyatī (ed.), Dinā, 7:63 citing MS Āstān-i quds-i Raḍawī (Mashhad) 8165. 
36 MS Kitābkhāna-yi Millī (Tehran) 3027; see Dirāyatī (ed.), Dinā, 7:67.
37 Dārābī, Riyāḍ al-ʿārifīn; See Dirāyatī (ed.), Dinā, 7:63–64, which mentions a unicum 
and autograph: MS Malik (Tehran) 2987 dated 1 Rajab 1077/December 1666.
38 See Dirāyatī (ed.), Dinā, 7:63–64 which mentions a unicum and autograph: MS Malik 
(Tehran) 2987 dated 1 Rajab 1077/December 1666.
39 See Dirāyatī (ed.), Dinā, 7:65 (9 copies). 
40 There are approximately 30 extant copies in Iranian collections – see Dirāyatī (ed.), 
Dinā, 7:814–815. An important commentary by Sayyid Niʿmatallāh al-Jazāʾirī was 
published recently. See al-Jazāʾirī, Nūr al-anwār and ʿAlī Khān Madanī Shīrāzī, Riyāḍ 
al-sālikīn.
41 Al-Bursī, Mashāriq anwār al-yaqīn; Dirāyatī (ed.), Dinā, 9:659–673 lists 108 manu-
scripts in Iran (of which only one is pre-Ṣafavid) and two Persian translations.
42 While written approximately a century before the Ṣafavid period, the extant manu-
scripts are Ṣafavid. See Dirāyatī (ed.), Dinā, 2:507–508 (19 copies).
43 The Baṣāʾir is a good example of a Ṣafavid rediscovery; it was discovered and popula-
rised in that period, hence the proliferation of extant Ṣafavid manuscripts in Iran. See 
Dirāyatī (ed.), Dinā, 2:506–507 (53 copies).

 define the tradition and are the foundations of his compilation.44 The clas-
sical hadith texts that he cites include the works of al-Shaykh al-Ṣadūq,45 
al-Maḥāsin of Aḥmad al-Barqī46 and Kāmil al-ziyāra of Ibn Qūlawayh, as 
well as classical hadith-based tafsīr. Interestingly, this list does not men-
tion the four books as a particular canon, perhaps because al-Majlisī wrote 
commentaries on them, especially his voluminous commentary on al-Kāfī. 
Key Texts that were Glossed
The following is a list of the key texts that were glossed; in most cases, these 
demonstrate that commentary was generally absent before the Ṣafavid 
period. These works can be broadly divided into works for jurists and 
those of theological and philosophical interest. For the jurists (and given 
the nature of those earlier compilations), the works of al-Ṭūsī and al-Ṣadūq 
were of paramount importance. On these, one finds manuscript evidence 
attesting to the following:
1.  Al-Istibṣār fī mā ikhtulifa min al-akhbār of al-Ṭūsī is an attempt 
to reconcile contradictory reports.47 As one expects, most of the 
commentaries on al-Istibṣār are by jurists such as Mīr Dāmād  
(d. 1040/1631).48
2.  Tahdhīb al-aḥkām is a larger work by al-Ṭūsī. It is a commentary 
on al-Mufīd’s fiqh manual entitled al-Muqniʾa, in which al-Ṭūsī 
asserts that contradictory hadith can lead to differences in sub-
stantive law (ikhtilāf fī furuʿ al-fiqh).49 Glosses from the earlier 
Ṣafavid period were written by jurists.50
44 Al-Majlisī, Biḥār al-anwār, 2:6–25.
45 Andrew Newman suggests that the works of al-Ṣadūq are a good example of Ṣafavid 
recovery – see his ‘The Recovery of the Past’. 
46 The Maḥāsin on its own is not well attested though it was discovered and popularised in 
the Ṣafavid period, perhaps because much of the material was incorporated into other 
texts, including al-Kāfī. See Dirāyatī (ed.), Dinā, 9:147–149 (49 copies). 
47 Dirāyatī (ed.), Dinā, 1:722–737 (491 copies, of which only 8 are pre-Ṣafavid).
48 Dirāyatī (ed.), Dinā 4:17; Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan Shīrwānī (d. 1098/1687): MS 
Gulpāyigānī (Qum) 6305/2, naskh of Khalf b. Yūsuf Najafī dated 8 Jumāda II 1103/1692, 
17ff.; Ḥusayn Khwānsārī (d. 1098/1687): MS Mahdawī (Tehran) 780 is an autograph; 
al-Jazāʾirī (d. 1112/1702): Kashf al-asrār.
49 Al-Ṭūsī, Tahdhīb al-aḥkām, 1:1; Dirāyatī (ed.), Dinā, 3:431–447 (991 copies, of which 
13 are pre-Ṣafavid). 
50 These glosses include the work of al-Ḥasan b. Zayn al-Dīn (Shahīd II) al-ʿĀmilī (d. 1011/ 
1602): Dirāyatī (ed.), Dinā 4:82 mentions 8 copies; for the work of Shīrwānī, see Dirāyatī 
(ed.), Dinā 4:82; al-Majlisī: MS Sipahsālār (Madrasa-yi Muṭahharī, Tehran) 4512, dated 
to the twelfth/eighteenth century, and MS Āstān-i quds-i rażavī (Mashhad) 9268, 168ff., 
dated to the twelfth/eighteenth century; Muḥammad Jaʿfar b. Muḥammad Ṭāhir Khurāsānī  
(d. 1152/1739): Dirāyatī (ed.), Dinā 4:83 mentions one short codex: MS Majlis-i Shūrā-yi 
islāmī (Tehran) 795 tāʾ, naskh of the twelfth/eighteenth century, kitāb al-ḥajj only. 
158 
SAJJAD RIZVI

  
THE WORDS OF THE IMAM  
159
3.  Man lā yaḥḍuruhu al-faqīh of al-Ṣadūq: this was mainly glossed 
by jurists such as Bahāʾ al-Dīn al-ʿĀmilī (d. 1030/1621).51 The 
influential Persian commentary Lawāmiʿ-yi ṣāḥibqirānī and the 
Arabic commentary Rawḍat al-muttaqīn, both by Muḥammad 
Taqī al-Majlisī (d. 1070/1659) are also noteworthy because they 
were used as manuals by his many followers.52 The legal selec-
tion Arbaʿūnā ḥadīthan of Bahāʾ al-Dīn al-ʿĀmilī, on which two 
important twelfth-/eighteenth-century commentaries are extant, 
can be seen as a related work.53 
Theologically speaking, al-Kulaynī’s work and al-Ṣadūq’s theological 
masterpiece al-Tawḥīd were more relevant and influential than the other 
four books. The manuscript evidence – and now the extensive publication 
project of Dār al-Ḥadīth in Qum – suggests the following:
1.  Al-Tawḥīd of al-Shaykh al-Ṣadūq was a popular text and one of 
the best examples of a Ṣafavid discovery;54 of note is the com-
mentary of the philosopher Qāḍī Saʿīd Qummī (d. 1107/1696) on 
al-Tawḥīd.55
2.  Al-Kāfī of al-Kulaynī: In his introduction to the Shīʿī hadith tradi-
tion and to al-Kāfī, Mīr Dāmād says that despite the prominence 
of the text of al-Kulaynī, a learned and trustworthy scholar, no 
one (up to his time) – jurist, theologian or philosopher – has 
attempted to explain the complexities and gloss the text.56 Given 
the central role of al-Kāfī as a purveyor of Shīʿī theology and 
Imamology, it is not surprising that there are large numbers 
of extant manuscripts of it from the Ṣafavid period. Impor-
tantly, al-Kulaynī suggests that those trained in philosophy are 
51 See al-ʿĀmilī, Arbaʿūna ḥadīthan; two glosses of it were the Ḥāshiya of Sayyid ʿAbdallāh 
al-Jazāʾirī (d. 1173/1759), and the Ḥāshiya of Ismāʿīl Khājūʾī (d. 1173/1759). See Dirāyatī 
(ed.), Dinā, 4:13.
52 See the bibliography for printed editions of these two texts.
53 See al-ʿĀmilī, Ḥāshiyat al-Faqīh; two other glosses include the Akhbārī Muḥammad Amīn 
Astarābādī: MS Markaz-i Iḥyāʾ (Qum) 2352/2, eleventh-/seventeenth-century nastaʿlīq 
of Muḥammad b. Jābir al-Najafī, 35ff.; Niẓām al-Dīn Gīlānī (d. after 1072/1662): MS 
Sālār Jung (Hyderabad) Arabic Hadith Imāmiyya 38.
54 Dirāyatī (ed.), Dinā, 3:388–391 (218 copies, all from the Ṣafavid period).
55 Fāḍil-i Sarāb Muḥammad b. ʿAbd al-Fattāḥ Tunikābunī (d. 1124/1713): MS Majlis-i 
Shūrā-yi islāmī (Tehran) 14719/5, nastaʿlīq of Muḥammad b. Ḥabīb ʿAlī Gīlānī, dated 
Rabīʿ I, 1115/1703, 24ff. 
56 Mīr Dāmād, al-Rawāshiḥ al-samāwiyya, 24. Mīr Dāmād never completed his commen-
tary on the uṣūl of al-Kāfī and his rather limited set of glosses only reaches the begin-
ning of kitāb al-ḥujja (incidentally this covers almost the same topics as Mullā Ṣadrā’s 
commentary, but it is much more precise); see Mīr Dāmād, al-Taʿlīqāt ʿalā kitāb al-Kāfī. 
There are a huge number of extant manuscripts of al-Kāfī in Iran but only fifteen are 
pre-Ṣafavid – see Dirāyatī (ed.), Dinā, 8:375–432 (2,589 copies).

 most suited to write such commentaries. The commentary that 
led to the flourishing of commentaries and glosses was that of 
Mullā Ṣadrā in the 1040s/1630s. Following Mullā Ṣadrā, major 
commentaries and glosses appeared. Among the commentar-
ies, we must note the monumental work of Muḥammad Ṣāliḥ 
Māzandarānī (d. 1081/1670) (son-in-law of Muḥammad Taqī 
al-Majlisī, d. 1070/1659), and the voluminous Mirʾāt al-ʿuqūl of 
Muḥammad Bāqir al-Majlisī (d. 1110/1699). Only Māzandarānī 
and al-Majlisī cover the entirety of the text; others only gloss the 
uṣūl.57 Among the glosses, we can include that of Mīr Dāmād and 
his students as well as some key figures like Muḥammad Amīn 
Astarābādī (d. 1036/1626).
Ṣafavid Encyclopaedia Works as Hadith Commentary
Notably, the hadith compilations and encyclopaedias of the Ṣafavid 
period also constitute a sort of commentary on the earlier hadith com-
pilations. The Biḥār al-anwār of al-Majlisī, as we have seen, was based 
on a number of earlier hadith texts and transmissions and in some cases 
even revived interest in texts that seemed to have been forgotten, such as 
the works narrated by al-Mufaḍḍal b. ʿUmar from Imam al-Ṣādiq, and 
the hadith-based Qur’anic exegesis narrated by Ibn Abī Zaynab ‘al-Kātib’ 
al-Numʿānī (d. 360/971) from ʿAlī.58 Another major compilation of that 
period was the ʿAwālim al-ʿulūm of Shaykh ʿAbdallāh al-Baḥrānī, a stu-
dent and confidant of al-Majlisī; there is some evidence that this work 
was meant as a completion or continuation of the Biḥār. Although it was 
planned as a very large undertaking (over a hundred volumes – by con-
trast, the Biḥār was twenty-five volumes), it is unclear how much was 
completed; of what is now extant and published, there is one volume 
on the intellect, four volumes on the twelfth Imam, and two volumes on 
Fāṭima al-Zahrāʾ. It was conceived as fifty volumes on uṣūl and fifty on 
furūʿ. The first volume is on terminology, the second concerns the intel-
lect, the third to the eighth are on the principles of faith and volumes 9 to 
26 are biographies of the Prophet, Fāṭima and the Imams. The remain-
ing volumes focus on ritual practices, social transactions and various ele-
ments of religious practice. It brings together texts from the four books 
but goes far beyond them. However, as a commentary, al-Baḥrānī’s selec-
tion and corroboration of texts is more important than his exegetical or 
explanatory interventions.
57 Al-Kāfī is divided into three sections: theology (uṣūl), specific questions of law and 
social transactions (furūʿ) and miscellaneous issues (rawḍa).
58 Al-Majlisī, Biḥār al-anwār, 90:1–105.
160 
SAJJAD RIZVI

  
THE WORDS OF THE IMAM  
161
The other two major hadith compilations of the period are also com-
mentaries on earlier hadiths: Wasāʾil al-shīʿa of al-Ḥurr al-ʿĀmilī (d. 
1104/1693) completed in 1087/1677 and al-Wāfī of Muḥsin Fayḍ Kāshānī 
(d. 1090/1679) completed in 1068/1658. The former work is a massive 
compendium divided into fifty books based on the order of the fiqh manual 
Sharāʾiʿ al-islām fī masāʾil al-ḥalāl wa-l-ḥarām of Najm al-Dīn, known as 
al-Muḥaqqiq al-Ḥillī (d. 676/1277).59 As al-Ḥurr al-ʿĀmilī says in his intro-
duction, the study of hadith as the ultimate science (not jurisprudence and 
legal theory based on the independence of reason, since he was an Akhbārī) 
is important because it comes from the Imams who are the infallible and 
inerrant source of knowledge; therefore, he sought to compile a work 
based on the earlier reliable sources of hadith that included all the issues 
of law.60 Al-ʿĀmilī sifted through the various texts and reconciled them in 
order to base the law on the Imams alone, and no one else (this was likely 
a critique of the more rationally minded uṣūlī jurists).61 In terms of his 
sources, he was clear that while he used the ‘four famous books of hadith’ 
(kutub al-ḥadīth al-arbaʿa), he was not restricted by them; he also quoted 
from other works and was careful to cite the proper references, as long as 
the work and the report were trustworthy and reputable.62 In this sense, 
one could say that in matters of ritual and transactional law, the compi-
lation is a critical commentary and evaluation of the hadith in the four 
books, drawing upon other works as well. He indicates his method by cit-
ing the texts he used: along with the four books, he used works of al-Ṣadūq 
such as al-Tawḥīd, Madīnat al-ʿilm (now lost) and ʿIlal al-sharāʾiʿ, al-Iḥtijāj 
of al-Ṭabrisī and the Baṣāʾir of al-Ṣaffār. He started, ‘I commend to you 
al-Kāfī [The sufficient], a work that corrects (tahdhīb) [the traditions] for 
one who has no jurist present (man lā yaḥḍuruhu al-faqīh) by the best 
of what appears to one’s insight (maḥāsin al-istibṣār)’.63 Thus, in the first 
sentence he mentions the titles of the four works and the early compilation 
of al-Barqī.
Al-Wāfī of Kāshānī is explicitly based on the four books, but more 
closely resembles the structure of al-Kāfī; it begins with the book on the 
intellect and comprises fifteen parts following the order of the earlier col-
lection (that is, al-Kāfī). In the introduction, Kāshānī describes the work as  
59 Najm al-Dīn al-Ḥillī, Sharāʾiʿ al-islām. There are over a hundred glosses and commen-
taries on this text of substantive Shīʿī law, which is divided into four sections: ritual 
worship (ʿibādāt), contracts (ʿuqūd), obligations and duties (īqāʿāt) and social precepts 
(aḥkām). It was popular in the Ṣafavid period because it was promoted as a school text 
according to the tradition of Shahīd II. 
60 Al-Ḥurr al-ʿĀmilī, Wasāʾil al-shīʿa, 1:8–9. 
61 Al-Ḥurr al-ʿĀmilī, Wasāʾil al-shīʿa, 1:12.
62 Al-Ḥurr al-ʿĀmilī, Wasāʾil al-shīʿa, 1:12.
63 Al-Ḥurr al-ʿĀmilī, Wasāʾil al-shīʿa, 1:13. 

 sufficient and extensive in the matters of faith, and bases it on the four prin-
cipal works that were dominant ‘in our time’, namely, al-Kāfī, al-Faqīh, 
Tahdhīb and Istibṣār.64 He then provides a short description of each of the 
works, starting with the ‘noblest, the most reliable, the most comprehensive 
and the most complete’ of them, al-Kāfī.65 But this is not just a compilation 
of texts, as he explicitly states, it is a commentary. He then examines three 
preliminary points for understanding and engaging the texts: how to study 
religious texts, how to make sense of the chains of transmission (isnāds) 
and how to understand the technical terms (muṣṭalaḥāt) he has used.66 He 
leaves the way open for a philosophical and mystical understanding of the 
text. In the first preliminary, he outlines the options starkly:
A person must be [one] of two types: either a verifier possessing 
mystical intuition and certainty (ṣāḥib kashf wa-yaqīn), or a fol-
lower who attests and acquiesces (ṣāḥib taṣdīq wa-taslīm). The third 
option is misguidance leading to destruction, confusing what is right 
with what is wrong.67 
Kāshānī goes further than al-Ḥurr. Kāshānī follows each hadith or set 
of hadiths with an explanation (bayān) that analyses the terms used and 
deploys his philosophical, theological and mystical training. In this sense, 
the commentary, especially the one on the first book of the intellect, seems 
to mirror much of the discussion of his teacher, Mullā Ṣadrā. 
The Case Study: The Intellect
As is often the case, and especially with the recent interest in commentary 
culture, commentaries on a particular text become battlegrounds for con-
flicting conceptions of knowledge, scholarship and visions of reality. I inter-
rogate this with respect to a case study of the commentaries on the hadiths 
relating to the intellect in al-Kāfī. The fundamental question at stake with 
respect to the notion of the intellect (ʿaql) was whether the hadiths were 
referring to (and could be reconciled with) philosophical notions of the 
higher intellects emanating from the One and the idea of the intellect as an 
immaterial substance both within and without the human person. Allied to 
this was the basic problem of terminology: (1) were technical terms in the 
hadith used in a conventional linguistic way, (2) could they be collated with 
usage and overlap in meaning with other disciplines (such as philosophy) 
64 Kāshānī, al-Wāfī, 1:4.
65 Kāshānī, al-Wāfī, 1:5–7. 
66 Kāshānī, al-Wāfī, 1:7–43.
67 Kāshānī, al-Wāfī, 1:12.
162 
SAJJAD RIZVI

  
THE WORDS OF THE IMAM  
163
or (3) were they particular to hadith or scriptural language as such? If one 
opted for the third possibility, it becomes difficult to see how hadith could 
really be applied outside the very specific context of a particular report. If 
the first option, did this conform to ordinary linguistic usage? Naturally, 
philosophers opted for the first and the second options. For the scriptur-
alists (such as Astarābādī), the kitāb al-ʿaql does not refer to the nous or 
any transcendent entity. Rather, the intellect is an innate faculty (gharīza), 
placed by God in humans as an inner guiding light (nūr) that motivates 
humans toward what is sound and appropriate to their nature and facili-
tates the distinction between what is right and what is wrong (al-tamayyuz 
bayn al-ṣawāb wa-l-khaṭaʾ), and as such it varies from person to person.68 
The scripturalists rejected a Neoplatonic reading of intellect and insisted 
that it was merely an internal faculty. Mullā Ṣadrā took this as a challenge 
to establish that intellect was both an internal human faculty as well as a 
transcendent reality and it was this position to which later commentators 
responded (positively or negatively). 
Mullā Ṣadrā
Mullā Ṣadrā (d. 1045/1636), perhaps the most famous philosopher inclined 
to mysticism in the Ṣafavid period, and student of hadith specialists such 
as Mīr Dāmād and al-Shaykh Bahāʾ al-Dīn al-ʿĀmilī, wrote the first major 
commentary on the theological sections of al-Kāfī. Unfortunately the 
commentary remained incomplete; the last section extant was completed 
in 1045/1635 and is at the beginning of the book on the imamate (kitāb 
al-ḥujja). One might argue that the popularity of glossing the theological 
sections of al-Kāfī began with Mullā Ṣadrā, and that others then responded 
to him. We can see this in the many glosses and commentaries after him 
that have now been published. Certainly, it seems to have been a successful 
commentary as manuscript copies attest.69 
Mullā Ṣadrā’s commentary on the nature of the intellect is predicated 
on his approach of reconciling philosophy and scripture because both are 
geared toward the acquisition of knowledge about the nature of reality by 
those who seek to achieve happiness in this life and in the hereafter. The 
introduction to the text makes his approach quite clear: On the one hand he 
makes a conventional apophatic assertion of the inability of human intel-
lects to grasp God, an assertion that necessitates the sending of messengers 
68 Astarābādī, al-Ḥāshiya, 85.
69 According to the Iranian union catalogue, Dinā, 6:974–978, there are 110 copies in 
Iran. However, the most successful commentary, in terms of the sheer number of extant 
codices is that of Māzandarānī (see Dirāyatī (ed.), Dinā, 6:978–986), of which there are 
249 copies. Al-Majlisī’s Mirʾāt al-ʿuqūl states that there are only 69 extant copies (this 
may relate to the sheer size) – see Dirāyatī (ed.), Dinā, 9:353–356.

 and revelation to allow humans to understand God sufficiently, and on 
the other hand, God’s gift of the intellect allows humans to understand 
their reality – and ultimately God – in order that they may gain felicitous 
salvation.70 Revelation acts as universal reason and the intellect reflects the 
inspired and revealed truths that God places within humans: The sound 
intellect (al-ʿaql al-ṣaḥīḥ) is supported by clear revelation (al-naql al-ṣarīḥ) 
and it is these practitioners of intellect – the godly scholars and wise people 
(al-ʿulamāʾ al-rabbāniyyīn wa-l-ḥukamāʾ) – who should explain the nature 
of the hadith.71 The intellect is therefore the key instrument – the axis that 
allows the person to arrive at truth and avoid falsehood – and Mullā Ṣadrā 
is keenly aware of the need to gloss its meaning.72 For him, al-Kāfī was the 
obvious and best repository of the hadith to gloss that sense of intellect, 
while recognising that many study both philosophy and hadith without 
understanding either, and he prays that he does not fall into that category.73 
His precise aim is not as clear: Was it to counter the simple Akhbārī accep-
tance of the entirety of the corpus without critical evaluation – and in a 
sense his critique of al-Kulaynī as compiler of the corpus suggests that he 
is no fan of ‘simple’ muḥaddithīn – or was it to make a claim for the supe-
rior ability and legitimacy of philosophers to claim the scriptural heritage 
central to their own pursuit?74 He states that he wishes to dive into the sea 
of wisdom that is the hadith corpus and extract the pearls of meaning to 
unveil the true nature of faith and bring them together with the meanings 
of the Qur’an, aided and supported by God’s favour and grace.75 A humble 
topos, but one based on the clear homology of God’s revelation in scripture 
and in the human intellect. Sometimes this homology is presented techni-
cally – for example, in the commentary on the sixth hadith (whoever has 
intellect has faith and whoever has faith enters paradise), he argues that the 
hadith is actually an assertoric syllogism in the first figure, and he proceeds 
to reconstruct the hadith in that manner.76
The commentary covers many aspects and glosses all the hadith in the 
Kitāb al-ʿAql (Book of intellect) including some elements on the chain of 
transmission and the philology. But his interest lies in the meaning. Four 
70 Shīrāzī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, 1:3–5.
71 Shīrāzī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, 1:7–8.
72 Shīrāzī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, 1:65.
73 Shīrāzī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, 1:8–9.
74 For his critique of al-Kulaynī, see Shīrāzī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, 1:12–13 and 63. Jari 
Kaukua has interestingly suggested that his intention may have been to provide philo-
sophical foundations for the authority of the jurist to use and manipulate hadith and 
this may follow the approach of his teacher, Mīr Dāmād, but there is much more  
we need to consider to substantiate that; see Kaukua, ‘The Intellect in Mullā Ṣadrā’s 
Commentary’.
75 Shīrāzī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, 1:10–12.
76 Shīrāzī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, 1:101–102.
164 
SAJJAD RIZVI

  
THE WORDS OF THE IMAM  
165
issues are central to this process: First, what is the nature of the intellect? 
Second, how can we relate the hadith on the intellect to the philosophi-
cal (Neoplatonic) account of the emanation of the cosmos mediated by 
intellects? Third, is the term intellect used univocally or is it a modulated 
concept? Finally, how does the function of the theoretical intellect relate 
to the practical – what is the connection between metaphysics and ethics? 
The first question is expressed in a practical way in the commentary on 
the third hadith (what is intellect), where he explains that intellect can be 
taken in six senses, drawing on al-Fārābī’s al-Risāla fī al-ʿaql (Treatise on 
the intellect):77 
1.  The first sense is an innate faculty (gharīza) that distinguishes 
humans from animals and prepares a person to receive theoreti-
cal knowledge and implement the rational arts – as a basic faculty 
in potentiality, this is equally present in the wise and the stupid, 
the unconscious and the conscious. This is our innate capacity 
to grasp first principles and is the sense used by philosophers in 
Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics (Kitāb al-Burhān). This is the theo-
retical intellect. 
2.  The second sense is a loose sense of reason used by theologians 
in their appeal to the rationality of their argument; this seems 
to be a notion of common sense and as such can be both fallible 
and infallible in function. This is a faulty notion of the theoretical 
intellect. 
3.  The third sense is an ethical notion of the practical intellect that 
is part of the human soul, whereby moral beliefs are held and 
constructed and constitute the foundation for the will to moral 
agency. This faculty develops in a person over time and with age 
and experience. 
4.  The fourth sense is another theologians’ common-sense approach 
to practical reason denoted by our concepts of a ‘clever person’ or 
a ‘good thinker’. This is a faulty notion of the practical intellect. 
5.  The fifth sense is the intellect, as it is discussed in Ibn Sīnā’s 
al-Shifāʾ: Fī al-nafs78 (De Anima), with the four stages from poten-
tiality to actuality that are faculties of the soul: the material intel-
lect, the dispositional intellect, the actual intellect and the acquired 
intellect.
77 Shīrāzī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, 1:84–89. Kaukua’s discussion is pertinent and worth con-
sidering. Al-Fārābī’s text is also cited in its entirety in Mullā Ṣadrā’s philosophical 
summa: see Shīrāzī, al-Ḥikma al-mutaʿāliya, 3:455–465; for a discussion of al-Fārābī in 
Ṣafavid thought, see Pourjavady and Schmidtke, ‘An Eastern Renaissance?’. See the text, 
translation, and its study in al-Fārābī, Épître sur l’intellect.
78 Ibn Sīnā, al-Shifāʾ, 1:5, 48–50.

 6.  The final sixth sense is the metaphysical notion that comes from 
the Theologia Aristotelis of the higher transcendent intellects 
uncontaminated by matter that only desire and contemplate the 
One. These are pure, good lights above our material world. 
The intellect is a term used in a modulated manner (bi-l-tashkīk) and 
not univocally.79 ʿAql is sometimes a practical intellect and sometimes theo-
retical. It is sometimes a faculty of humans and what distinguishes humans 
from animals, and at other times it is a celestial, eternal thing that ema-
nates from the One. Crucially the sound intellect must be distinguished 
from a cunning and satanic deviance – if it is oriented toward the Good, 
the principles of the faith and mystical intuition of God in order to pro-
duce quietude of the soul and steadfastness, and if it is derived from the 
moral psychology of the believer it can be separated from the actions and 
thoughts of the followers of Satan, from whom even the simple-minded are 
privileged.80 The key feature that unites all of these instances and mean-
ings of intellect is that they remain incorporeal and immaterial.81 While 
the intellect can be attached to a body, the intellect and the intellectual  
faculty are decidedly not corporeal. Later commentators follow Mullā 
Ṣadrā on the point that the intellect is an immaterial substance, an innate 
faculty in the human that emerges from the higher intelligible world and 
becomes the standard for discerning the truth and the good.82
The commentary on the first hadith (on the creation of the intellect) 
pins Mullā Ṣadrā’s clear reconciliation of the hadith with an emanationist 
cosmology. For him the creation of the intellect and its speech and reason-
ing is the first creation, the first thing that issued from God – and he relates 
this transcendent first creation to the hadith that states that the first cre-
ation was the intellect, the light of Muhammad (awwal mā khalaq Allāhu 
nūrī) and the pen (al-qalam), which are meanings for a single referent.83 
There are two aspects of this first creation: It is the first in a chain of ema-
nations that in particular populates the higher intelligible world and once 
emanated, all these entities in their pure intelligible form have an erotic 
desire to return to their origins, but it is also the case that since the intel-
lect is associated with the Prophet’s reality it becomes the pivotal mode 
79 Shīrāzī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, 1:84. 
80 Shīrāzī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, 1:90.
81 Shīrāzī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, 1:91.
82 Aḥmad al-ʿAlawī, al-Ḥāshiya, 62, 64–65, 70; Shīrāzī, al-Kashf al-wāfī, 1:32–39. How-
ever, his son Sayyid Badr al-Dīn disagreed and argued that the context and wording of 
the hadith that declare the intellect to be the first spiritual being created from the right 
side of the divine empyrean suggests that it had a location and hence was not devoid of 
any matter – see Badr al-Dīn al-ʿAlawī, al-Ḥāshiya, 40. 
83 Shīrāzī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, 1:73–74.
166 
SAJJAD RIZVI

  
THE WORDS OF THE IMAM  
167
for expressing and fulfilling the moral obligations that believing creatures 
acquire.84 The emanationist scheme – coupled with Mullā Ṣadrā’s doctrine 
of motion in the category of substance as essential to the human rational 
soul – is further investigated in the long commentary on the famous four-
teenth hadith on the armies of intellect and ignorance.85 The motion of the 
intellect expressed in the hadith is associated with the Neoplatonic scheme 
of emanation and reversion through his notion of motion in substance: 
The ʿaql becomes a soul, in turn becoming nature, then form, then a body, 
and in reverse the rational embodied soul progresses in motion to become 
a form, then nature, then a celestial soul and then a pure intellect.86 In the 
human soul this substantial motion is expressed by the transformation of 
the material intellect to the acquired intellect, which is capable of union 
with the active intellect. 
However, this hadith also raises a problem, since the creation of igno-
rance seems to confer on it a positive, existential meaning – and usually in 
the Neoplatonism of Mullā Ṣadrā, non-existence, like evil and ignorance, 
is a privation.87 He explains that what is meant by ignorance is not simple 
ignorance (jahl basīṭ), which is a privative matter since it is the absence of 
knowledge and hence cannot be created, nor is it compound ignorance 
(jahl murakkab), which is an accidental form in the mind that fails to cor-
respond to mental or extra-mental reality.88 Rather it is a psychic substance 
and a psychological aspect that adheres to the human soul; a false belief – 
an act of ignorance – is therefore a psychological state of a person with the 
propensity to accept falsehood.89 He gives the analogy of pain that can be 
felt – a real evil so to speak – in the soul, and similarly the pain of being in 
error, which can also be felt in the soul.90 The case of ignorance does pose 
a problem for Mullā Ṣadrā, as it challenges his metaphysics and in a sense, 
forces him to explain the hadith figuratively and deny its literal sense.
Considering the element of a person’s moral psychology brings us to 
the final point about the nature of the practical intellect that is discussed 
in the commentary on the tenth hadith (and in more detail on virtues and 
vices and the range of moral psychology in hadith no. 14). It was quite 
common in the Ṣafavid period and beyond for ethical considerations to 
arise from engagement with hadiths. Here Mullā Ṣadrā’s concern is with 
84 Shīrāzī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, 1:76–78.
85 Shīrāzī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, 1:325–494. This is the largest section of the commentary on 
the kitāb al-ʿaql.
86 Shīrāzī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, 1:330–331.
87 Shīrāzī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, 1:341 (see also his commentary on the twelfth hadith on the 
virtues of the intellect, 1:307–318).
88 Shīrāzī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, 1:331.
89 Shīrāzī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, 1:333.
90 Shīrāzī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, 1:334–335.

 ‘satanic’ temptation and whispering as a lapse in the rational soul, a lapse 
that is equated with ignorance in the revelation. This is an example of the 
homology of reason and revelation spelled out as lapse equals ignorance.91 
The context of hadith no. 10 (which deals with a rational person being 
misled by satanic whispering while performing ablutions) is performing 
one’s ablutions and trying to engender tranquillity in the soul, which is 
disrupted by ‘satanic’ distraction (waswās). Mullā Ṣadrā’s explanation of 
the moral psychology and the role of the practical intellect brings together 
insights from Sufi psychology and philosophy. His starting point is the sub-
tle centre of the human, which is called the ‘heart’ (al-qalb) in the language 
of revelation and the ‘rational soul’ (al-nafs al-nāṭiqa) in the language of 
philosophy (once again this is a process of translating terms across con-
texts), and this mediates between the corporeal world and the spiritual and 
intelligible world (whence it came) and is the ground for all our moral 
actions. The motivations and perceptions that arise from the rational soul 
lead to actions, informed as they are by data that we have received from 
sense perception or from our inner psychological states whether positive 
(imagination for example) or negative (such as passionate vices and lusts). 
These aspects of data processed internally constitute ‘thoughts’ (khawāṭir) 
that move our intentions and desires. These thoughts constituting our 
internal will are therefore the basis of our intentions and deliberations 
to act. However, these thoughts that motivate our intentions and actions 
are of two types: those that motivate toward evil and hence harm our des-
tination, and those that motivate toward the good, thus benefiting us in 
the hereafter. The former are known as ‘satanic’ distraction (waswās) and 
are propelled by a satan, and the latter are ‘inspirations’ (ilhām) that are 
guided by an angel.92 In many ways this particular commentary is a good 
example of how Mullā Ṣadrā blends discourses from scripture, Sufism, phi-
losophy and hadith, drawing on further texts on the human heart or soul as 
lying between the two ‘fingers’ of God. Thus, his commentary is not merely  
an act of eisegesis in which he attempts to make the hadith conform to 
philosophy but a creative approach to a holistic development of wisdom. 
Ṣāliḥ Māzandarānī
Ḥusām al-Dīn Muḥammad Ṣāliḥ b. Aḥmad Māzandarānī (d. 1081/1670) 
was a student and son-in-law of Muḥammad Taqī al-Majlisī. He was 
known for his teaching of the theological parts of al-Kāfī, as attested by 
his (and Muḥammad Bāqir al-Majlisī’s) student ʿAbdallāh Afandī (d. c. 
1130/1718).93 Later biographers noted that he was famed for his expertise 
91 Shīrāzī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, 1:113. 
92 Shīrāzī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, 1:116–117.
93 Afandī, Riyāḍ al-ʿulamāʾ, 5:110.
168 
SAJJAD RIZVI

  
THE WORDS OF THE IMAM  
169
in hadith and philosophy and that his hadith commentary is one of the 
best and most complete.94 At the beginning of his commentary, in his pro-
emium, he uses the standard language of philosophy and mysticism, while 
later, when glossing the meaning of praise by engaging the arguments of 
Jalāl al-Dīn Dawānī, he shows his mastery of the philosophical theological 
tradition.95 He states that he wrote a complete set of glosses on the hadith 
in the text, glosses that were sufficient based on all the disciplines the texts 
mention and allude to and based on his understanding of what was suf-
ficient.96 He does not mention why he chose to comment on al-Kāfī or 
whether he consulted earlier commentaries. At the end of the gloss on the 
proemium, he articulates his understanding of the nature of the intellect; 
he glosses the phrase on the axial nature of the intellect by explaining that 
it is the faculty that judges the nature of good and evil and helps a person 
fulfil his moral obligation and discern the nature of extra-mental reality, 
all the while being somewhat apophatic on the possibility of truly grasping  
the nature of external objects.97 
The commentary on the book of the intellect is lengthy and compre-
hensive; it is almost three hundred pages, making it second only to that of 
Mullā Ṣadrā in size.98 On the first instance of ʿaql, with respect to the first 
hadith (on the creation of the intellect), Māzandarānī begins by defining 
the intellect and establishing that it differs in degrees and states, of which 
he enumerates six.99 The intellect is an immaterial substance that manages 
the body; when it is compared to the body it is called the rational soul (nafs 
nāṭiqa), when it is described with respect to matter it is called an intel-
lect. As an immaterial substance it is associated with the higher intelligible 
(sacred) realm that it came from and where it yearns to return. The six 
states that it possesses are the following:
1.  A state of pure preparedness to become perfected.
2.  A state that is capable of discerning basic or self-evident truths 
(awwaliyyāt). 
3.  A state in which it is capable of discerning theoretical knowledge 
(naẓariyyāt) in the mirror of basic truths.
4.  A state in which it can discern theoretical knowledge, even after 
it no longer perceives the forms in which they are manifest  
and it can recall those forms – this is the state of ‘knowledge of 
94 Khwānsārī, Rawḍāt al-jannāt, 4:118–120.
95 Māzandarānī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī (based on the earlier edition of ʿAlī-Akbar Ghaffārī), 
1:18–19.
96 Māzandarānī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, 1:17.
97 Māzandarānī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, 1:25–28, 63–64.
98 Māzandarānī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, 1:65–332.
99 Māzandarānī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, 1:66–67. 

 certainty’ (ʿilm al-yaqīn) since it is capable of perceiving purely 
intelligible forms in themselves. 
5.  A state of the ‘essence of certainty’ (ʿayn al-yaqīn) in which it can 
perceive intelligible forms in their emanated form (that is, in the 
active intellect). 
6.  A final state that is the very ‘reality of certainty’ (ḥaqq al-yaqīn) 
in which it conjoins spiritually with the emanated intellect (that 
is, the active intellect) and continues to progress spiritually. This 
is the highest state of the creature, the state in which it is a pure 
perfected intellect. 
This description of the progression of the human intellect from the 
material origins of the intellect as the first entelechy of the natural body 
(kamāl awwal li-jism ṭabīʿī) to the perfected intellect capable of acquiring 
infallible knowledge through conjunction with the active intellect, in which 
the intelligible forms of everything reside, recalls and reconciles the psy-
chology of Ibn Sīnā with a Sufi understanding of the states of experiential 
and intuitive knowledge.100 
But Māzandarānī goes on to say that by intellect we may also mean 
the transcendent immaterial intellects that are the first spiritual beings and 
first things that emanate from God. He does not cite the famous hadith, 
‘The first thing God created was the intellect’, even though it was widely 
accepted by his colleagues who were similarly influenced by philosophy 
and mysticism.101 The higher intelligible world is arranged in a hierarchy 
of intensity up to the light of lights, who is God; here Māzandarānī seems 
to invoke Mullā Ṣadrā’s notion of the modulation of being when he argues 
that those intellects in the higher intelligible world are in degrees of being 
determined by intensity. But at the same time, he rejects that causal effi-
cacy of those higher intellects with respect to engendering the spheres, for 
he insists that only God Himself creates those spheres; thus, Māzandarānī 
explicitly rejects the doctrine of ‘some philosophers’.102 It is important that 
he accepts that intellect applies to both a property in a human person and a 
100 In the De Anima I.5 of Ibn Sīnā (d. 428/1037), these stages are the material intellect 
(ʿaql hayūlānī), the dispositional intellect (ʿaql bi-l-malaka), the actual intellect (ʿaql 
bi-l-fiʿl) and the acquired intellect (ʿaql mustafād) – once the intellect is at this final 
stage it can conjoin with the active intellect that transcends this world, and this is the 
closest stage of the emanation from God to the world; see Ibn Sīnā, al-Shifāʾ, 49–50. 
The language of stages of certainty goes back to classical Sufism, not least Aḥmad 
al-Ghazālī, but it is well established in the Ṣafavid period and constitutes an organis-
ing principle in the work of Māzandarānī’s contemporary, Muḥsin Fayḍ Kāshānī, who 
sets out to reconcile the truth claims and visions of reality of the philosophers and the 
scriptures in his ʿAyn al-yaqīn, 1:22.
101 For example, Kāshānī, Maqāmāt al-qalb, 12.
102 Māzandarānī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, 1:67–68. 
170 
SAJJAD RIZVI

  
THE WORDS OF THE IMAM  
171
separable, immaterial substance, and that he also seems to accept elements 
of Mullā Ṣadrā’s metaphysics and epistemology. He also raises a key moral 
point about the function of the intellect to discern good and evil and hence 
to acquire rewards and recompense appropriately – a point later reiterated 
by Muḥammad Bāqir al-Majlisī.103
In his commentary on the second hadith – in which Adam is presented 
by Gabriel with a selection of three ‘things’ (intellect, faith, shame) from 
which to choose – Māzadarānī clarifies that the inner light and psycho-
logical faculty of the person is intended. By this light and faculty, he may 
distinguish between good and evil, may discern metaphysical knowledge 
about the origins and the end of life, and may unveil the intelligible forms 
hidden within sensibilia.104 He further emphasises that Adam’s choice of 
intellect is not merely a parable for all humans, but is also a demonstration 
of the superiority and perfection of intellects – qua faculty – that prophets 
and friends of God have. The distinction of degrees is made clearer in the 
commentary on the three hadiths in which the Imams deny that Muʿāwiya 
had intellect; that is, a true intellect that is devoid of the contamination of 
material attachment, that yearns for the higher intelligible purity of truth 
and goodness and that should motivate a person to act in accordance with 
what he knows.105 Therefore, the actions of Muʿāwiya – removed from truth 
and goodness – belie his possession of intellect. This focus on the actions 
– or the outer states – is also evident in Māzandarānī’s acceptance of the 
two-fold nature of the intellect (from the Aristotelian tradition). He glosses 
his commentary on the hadith, ‘when a person comes to you with good 
traits look to the soundness of his intellect’, in terms of the Aristotelian 
division between the theoretical and the practical intellect.106 Thus, con-
sistent with the complementarity of what one knows and how one acts, 
the exoteric and esoteric states of the person’s intellect (or of the theoreti-
cal and practical intellects) must also be in harmony. This complemen-
tarity is clarified in the way in which ignorance and ‘satanic’ distractions 
(waswās) are understood with respect to the sound intellect and angelic 
inspiration located in the struggles of the human heart or the rational 
soul (in the commentary on the tenth hadith especially).107 Here we see 
that Māzandārānī’s approach and language are rather like those of Mullā  
Ṣadrā, but Māzandārānī seems far less disturbed by the notion of the  
creation of ignorance and its substantiation.
In the commentary of Māzandarānī, we see the significant influence 
of the approaches to reconciling hadith with philosophical and mystical 
103 Māzandarānī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, 1:72. 
104 Māzandarānī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, 1:73. 
105 Māzandarānī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, 1:74–76. 
106 Māzandarānī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, 1:84.
107 Māzandarānī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, 1:75, 85–86.

 learning that were evident in the exegesis of Mullā Ṣadrā, except that these 
approaches adhere more closely to the basic requirements of commen-
tary, as they assess the isnād and the scholarly transmission apparatus (i.e. 
regarding the narrator’s reliability and the status of the hadith as ṣaḥīḥ) 
alongside a serious reconsideration in which the scripture seems to contra-
dict philosophical doctrine.108 If a choice has to be made between philoso-
phy and hadith, Māzandarānī clearly chooses the latter. 
al-Majlisī
In the work of al-Majlisī, this approach to the hadith material, the care-
ful philology and consideration of the transmission and the seriousness 
with which he takes the hadith are evident.109 Before turning to the com-
mentary, it is worth discussing al-Majlisī’s position on the nature of the 
intellect and his critique of the philosophers’ positions, which appear 
in two sections of Biḥār al-anwār, not least because we can discern the 
themes that appear in the commentary. His encyclopaedia shares with 
al-Kāfī the order of theological discussions, beginning with the book on 
intellect and ignorance and the book of knowledge (kitāb al-ʿaql wa-l-jahl, 
kitāb al-ʿilm). Later in the books on cosmology (al-samāʾ wa-l-ʿālam), he 
returns to the question of the intellect in cosmogony and discusses the 
incipience of the cosmos (ḥudūth al-ʿālam), including a critique of phi-
losophers for maintaining that the cosmos is eternal and not created in 
time and also that it comes about through a process of emanation in which 
intellects feature as eternal mediating causes.110 In particular, he attacks 
one report that is usually cited as a hadith: ‘the first thing created was 
the intellect’, saying that this is not a hadith in the Shīʿī tradition, and 
furthermore, it is contradicted by both the Shīʿī tradition and even the 
pre-Socratics. He also cites the tradition of Thales of Miletus, (ps-)Appo-
lonius of Tyana, and Plutarch, mentioning that the first thing in fact was 
water.111 He condemns the hadith as a Sunnī fabrication (and by implica-
tion he questions the Shīʿī credentials of Shīʿī philosophers).112 This is a 
classic polemical stratagem to deploy the authorities of opponents against 
them. He concludes that section by conceding that the intellect was the  
108 The similarity of language and at times particular interpretations certainly suggests 
that Māzandarānī had not only read Mullā Ṣadrā but may well have been influenced 
by him.
109 Note that there are studies in Persian comparing the approaches of al-Majlisī and 
Mullā Ṣadrā, not least on the question of the intellect. One of the better ones is al-Kāfī, 
‘Mafhūm-i ʿaql’. 
110 Al-Majlisī, Biḥār al-anwār, 54:278–309.
111 Al-Majlisī, Biḥār al-anwār, 54:306–308.
112 Al-Majlisī, Biḥār al-anwār, 1:102.
172 
SAJJAD RIZVI

  
THE WORDS OF THE IMAM  
173
first spiritual thing created, and was clearly posterior to water because the 
empyrean of God itself ‘sits’ on water.113
The discussion in the earlier part of the Biḥār is more extensive. One sees 
how the text is far more than just a selection; after the citation of Qur’anic 
verses on a topic and then the arrangement of hadith in topical sections, he 
concludes with a commentarial explanation (bayān). He praises the intel-
lect as a faculty that is in close conformity – as the Shīʿī tradition held – with 
revelation and the law. In this world, both the intellect – as a capacity and 
faculty in the person – and the law are perfected to allow a person to enjoy 
the freedom to choose to believe in God and take on their moral obligation 
(taklīf).114 He also affirms the existence of intelligibles and unlike earlier theo-
logians, he is not a materialist. He states that there are intelligible entities 
and forms, and this is why the offer to Adam (in the first hadith in the sec-
tion) to choose between faith, intellect and shame should not be read liter-
ally, because it was the intelligible forms of those notions that were presented 
to Adam.115 He comes close to accepting that the intellect is a ‘thing’ when he 
states that intellects vary in different people according to the perfection of 
their rational faculty and their propensities and dispositions.116 However, he 
discusses the nature of the intellect and puts forward the six conceptions of 
the intellect available to him, the first two being textually admitted, the next 
two textually possible, but the last two, which are associated with philoso-
phers, are to be rejected as incompatible with tradition. These are the six:117
1. a faculty that is capable of perceiving good and evil and distinguishing 
them in order to facilitate the person’s fulfilment of their moral obligation; 
2. a property that resides in the soul, capable of acquiring good and evil 
and possessing the ability to act on that knowledge;
3. a faculty that is used by people in order to make sense of their world and 
arrange their affairs;
4. states of a property that reside in a soul that is capable of acquiring theo-
retical knowledge;
5. the rational soul of humans that differentiates them from other animals 
(following Aristotle); and
6. an eternal, immaterial substance whose relationship to the Active Intel-
lect is like that of the body to the soul in the human.
The fundamental problem with the sixth option is two-fold: it means that 
the intellect is eternal while only God is eternal and the cosmos incipient,  
113 Al-Majlisī, Biḥār al-anwār, 54:309.
114 Al-Majlisī, Biḥār al-anwār, 1:83–84.
115 Al-Majlisī, Biḥār al-anwār, 1:86.
116 Al-Majlisī, Biḥār al-anwār, 1:97–98.
117 Al-Majlisī, Biḥār al-anwār, 1:99–101.

 created ex nihilo, and it presumes that the intellect is immaterial, but for 
al-Majlisī only God is wholly immaterial. Theologically, only the souls of the 
Prophet and the Imams exist prior to the cosmos that comes into being in 
space and time with the creation of bodies.118 The positions of philosophers 
are therefore rejected as mere fantasies and strange imaginings (muwahhimāt 
wa-khayālāt gharība).119 
Al-Majlisī’s voluminous commentary on al-Kāfī is relatively concise 
on the question of the intellect, which is primarily seen as a faculty that 
brings a person into harmony with the divine law and suppresses his car-
nal desires and caprice.120 In the introduction he makes it clear that the 
cacophony of claims and forms of deception and deviation in his time –  
and in particular he accuses the Sufis – have distracted people from the 
true guidance and wisdom of the Imams; he sees it as his duty to reori-
ent people to those fonts of wisdom.121 In the commentary on the first 
hadith, he reiterates the six senses of intellect that he mentioned in the 
Biḥār, insisting that the intended meaning was the linguistic meaning of 
a faculty of understanding and grasping.122 He also repeats his rejection  
of the first hadith, that the first creation was the intellect. Similarly, he 
rejects the philosophical gloss that the hadith about the command of God 
for the intellect to approach and to retreat is a metaphor for the Neopla-
tonic procession from the One and reversion to the One. For him, intellect 
in the hadith does not denote the philosophical conception of the nous 
as the first emanated being from which the spheres emanate.123 However, 
in his commentary on the fourteenth hadith (on the opposing armies of 
the intellect and ignorance), he seems to accept the esoteric philosophical 
account: the intellect represents what is luminous and immaterial from 
God, and ignorance is an expression of the problem of embodiment in 
matter and the attachment of the person with matter.124 The brevity of the 
commentary and al-Majlisī’s insistence on the evaluation of the transmis-
sion and on philological matters is part of a strategy, it seems, to deflect 
attention from a philosophical reading that on the whole he rejects, except 
in elements of the commentary on the fourteenth hadith. Unlike Mullā 
Ṣadrā, al-Majlisī cannot admit to a sense of intellect that is beyond the 
univocal as an innate capacity for cognition of moral truths and basic 
beliefs about the cosmos. 
118 Again, this may be a concession to the conflation of the first creation as intellect and 
the light of the Prophet; al-Majlisī, Biḥār al-anwār, 1:103–104.
119 Al-Majlisī, Biḥār al-anwār, 1:101–102.
120 Al-Majlisī, Mirʾāt al-ʿuqūl, 1:25–98.
121 Al-Majlisī, Mirʾāt al-ʿuqūl, 1:1–3.
122 Al-Majlisī, Mirʾāt al-ʿuqūl, 1:25–28. 
123 Al-Majlisī, Mirʾāt al-ʿuqūl, 1:30.
124 Al-Majlisī, Mirʾāt al-ʿuqūl, 1:65–67.
174 
SAJJAD RIZVI

  
THE WORDS OF THE IMAM  
175
Qummī
In one sense Qāḍī Saʿīd Qummī (d. 1107/1696) is the outlier, as his works 
are not formally a commentary on al-Kāfī but an independent treatise in 
which he combines commentaries on various hadiths in al-Kāfī and his 
famous commentary on al-Shaykh al-Ṣadūq’s Kitāb al-Tawḥīd. Completed 
in Qum on 10 Dhū al-Qaʿda 1084/February 1674, the treatise, entitled 
Mirqāt al-asrār wa-miʿrāj al-anwār (‘Stepping stones of arcana and the 
ascension of lights’), is on the nature of the incipience of the cosmos and 
deals with the Neoplatonic hypostases of intellect, soul and matter.125 The 
text covers emanation as well as the description of the material cosmos and 
its contrast with the intelligible higher world and indeed with the interme-
diary ‘imaginal world’, all the while it links his positions with hadiths. 
In this text, we see three main claims; these reoccur in his commentary 
on al-Tawḥīd. The first is that the first entity – the first emanated thing –  
is the intellect (ʿaql) that arises from the Principle (al-mabdaʾ), that is God 
and God’s self-intellection from which emanates the first in the chain of 
being that in turn, through the act of intellection and contemplation, pro-
duces the soul and then nature and matter and so forth. He affirms the 
validity of the hadith that the intellect is the first creation and that it is 
synonymous with the light of Muhammad, the calamus, and many other 
scriptural names.126 The second claim is that the intellect is wholly imma-
terial and it desires its like; its very nature is intellecting and seeking out 
the intelligible.127 The third claim is that the intelligible is superior to the 
sensible and constitutes the higher ‘divine’ realm of existence, and in that 
the influence of the Theologia Aristotelis is clear.128 In fact on the chain  
of being that connects the three worlds – of sensibilia, of imagibilia and of 
intelligibilia – he cites the Theologia on how the plenitude and perfection of 
the higher intelligible world is reflected in a less perfect manner in the sen-
sible world, and it is the function of the imaginal world (ʿālam al-mithāl) to 
link the sensible to the intelligible through the function and substance of 
the human intellect.129 The existence of the sensibilia is preceded by matter; 
for intelligibilia, it is preceded by intellect – and matter itself is preceded by 
intellect, making the latter ontologically prior and privileged.130 
In his commentary on one of the key hadith collections rediscovered in 
the Ṣafavid period, the Kitāb al-Tawḥīd of al-Shaykh al-Ṣadūq, Qummī dis-
cusses the nature of the intellect, the intelligible world and how knowledge 
125 This is the fourth treatise in his collection; see Qummī, al-Arbaʿīniyyāt, 115–156.
126 Qummī, al-Arbaʿīniyyāt, 118–119, 131–133. 
127 Qummī, al-Arbaʿīniyyāt, 120.
128 Qummī, al-Arbaʿīniyyāt, 134, 137–138.
129 Qummī, al-Arbaʿīniyyāt, 146–147.
130 Qummī, al-Arbaʿīniyyāt, 150–151.

 is produced by the intellect. These matters are necessarily about the nature 
of intellect with respect to God. The first issue in the discussion of God’s 
transcendent unity relates to the affirmation of the reality of a higher intel-
ligible realm and the existence of higher immaterial intellects. The intel-
ligible realm is immaterial and emanates from God, beginning with the first 
emanated thing which is the intellect, which Qummī articulates, following  
(as he explicitly says) Plato, in order to gloss the meaning of the hadith 
phrase that ‘God has nothing prior to him’.131 The procession from the 
One that proceeds through the intelligibilia through to the sensibilia of this 
world is reversed in the reversion to the One – eschatology so to speak – 
when Qummī comments on the hadith about the entities of the afterlife  
and the move from the sensibilia of this world to the intelligibilia of the after-
life and its perfection, once again mediated by the intellect.132 The higher 
intelligible – divine – realm that is both prior and posterior to our mate-
rial world is populated with immaterial substances and intellects arranged 
in a chain of being.133 This comes primarily in the context of commenting 
on God’s eternity and transcendence and the nature of His creative agency 
– and clearly, like most Neoplatonists, Qummī thinks the distinction 
between creation and emanation is that of theological and philosophical 
language alone.134 Desire (shawq) is what connects the chain of being –  
matter for the immaterial, the pneumatic for the noetic, and the intelligibles 
for other intelligibles and ultimately God.135 Nevertheless the apophati-
cism of his Neoplatonism remains clear: intellects (human and otherwise)  
yearn for God but there is no way in which they can truly arrive, in their 
creaturely, contingent, emanated nature, at the very plane of the majesty  
of the divine.136
The second issue Qummī discusses concerns the nature of divine 
knowledge and the intellect. In this, he takes an apophatic approach and 
categorically says what God’s knowledge is not. After complaining about 
the ink spilt in vain on the question of knowledge and the function of the 
intellect, he outlines four main theories of knowledge: (Aristotelian) rep-
resentational knowledge (ʿilm ḥuṣūlī), knowledge by presence (ḥuḍūrī), 
knowledge through an illuminative annexation (iḍāfa ishrāqiyya) and 
knowledge by union (with the active intellect).137 These are all modes of 
understanding human knowledge and given the element of contingency 
and passivity cannot possibly be entertained for God. They all entail an 
131 Qummī, Sharḥ tawḥīd al-Ṣadūq, 1:132.
132 Qummī, Sharḥ tawḥīd al-Ṣadūq, 1:553.
133 Qummī, Sharḥ tawḥīd al-Ṣadūq, 1:202–207.
134 Qummī, Sharḥ tawḥīd al-Ṣadūq, 1:227–232.
135 Qummī, Sharḥ tawḥīd al-Ṣadūq, 1:216–217.
136 Qummī, Sharḥ tawḥīd al-Ṣadūq, 1:236.
137 Qummī, Sharḥ tawḥīd al-Ṣadūq, 2:443.
176 
SAJJAD RIZVI

  
THE WORDS OF THE IMAM  
177
element of alterity and God’s dependence on an external cause. The terms 
intellect and knowledge are used analogically for God, but He does not 
depend on ‘forms’ that are the principal intermediary in representational 
knowledge either for His knowledge before things come into existence (of 
potential entities in the mind of God so to speak) or for actual ones.138 This 
is clearly a rejection of Aristotle and even of Ibn Sīnā’s notion of ‘God’s 
knowledge of particulars in a universal sense’. There are two principal rea-
sons that God’s knowledge cannot be presential: first, presence entails the 
existence of another and is concomitant to it, thus making God dependent, 
and second, presence is the state of a thing and is contrary to the perfection 
of the divine essence, which includes the possibility of being in states.139 
Similarly, the annexational theory does not work because all relations are 
dependencies, which is also true of union.140 These two points refute the 
positions of Suhrawardī and Mullā Ṣadrā. Qummī also does not approve 
of the ascription of a distinction between general and detailed knowledge 
with respect to God because God’s knowledge of entities is the same before 
they came into existence as it is while they exist – God’s knowledge knows 
no limit.141 The apophatic approach is also used to make sense of the denial 
that God is a body since bodies entail dyads of matter and spirit and, 
especially, of matter and intellect in which each is a substance. In a broad 
sense, Qummī accepts that intellects are substances either within or with-
out humans but that the divine intellect is not a substance (either in the 
sense of being a hylomorphic dyad of matter and form, or in the sense of 
being a substrate in which accidental properties inhere). Qummī similarly 
accepts the emanation of intellects from God’s self-intellection and in that 
context, he affirms the hadith that the first thing created was the nous (con-
trary to al-Majlisī).142 On the immanent intellect, he even cites Ibn Sīnā’s 
famous use of the parable of light verse (Q. 24:35) to describe the states 
of the human intellect from material passivity to intellectual activity and 
conjunction with the transcendent active intellect.143 As a Neoplatonist, 
Qummī holds firm to a strong principle of plenitude; that is, all that is 
possible comes into existence and all that exists in extra-mental reality was 
previously in God’s knowledge.144 
Qummī’s Neoplatonic commitments are clear in his commentaries 
affirming the substantiality of the intellect – both the transcendent and  
the human. In fact, as we can see from his commentary on the Theologia 
138 Qummī, Sharḥ tawḥīd al-Ṣadūq, 2:444. 
139 Qummī, Sharḥ tawḥīd al-Ṣadūq, 2:446.
140 Qummī, Sharḥ tawḥīd al-Ṣadūq, 2:447–448.
141 Qummī, Sharḥ tawḥīd al-Ṣadūq, 2:449. 
142 Qummī, Sharḥ tawḥīd al-Ṣadūq, 2:297–298, 419–420.
143 Qummī, Sharḥ tawḥīd al-Ṣadūq, 2:609–611.
144 Qummī, Sharḥ tawḥīd al-Ṣadūq, 2:457–460.

 Aristotelis, in which he adduces hadiths as commentarial material, his Neo-
platonism is more striking and dominant than that of any other thinkers 
on the intellect in the Ṣafavid period.145 His is the most prominent example 
of hadith exegesis as philosophy. 
Conclusion
As an activity, hadith commentary in the Shīʿī tradition is a Ṣafavid phe-
nomenon and creation motivated by the desire to rediscover and revive 
the Shīʿī scriptural tradition. But as we have seen with the case study of the 
nature of the intellect in al-Kulaynī’s Uṣūl al-Kāfī, the act of commentary 
was used by various thinkers to put forward their worldview and under-
standing of knowledge and the use of hadith. Mullā Ṣadrā’s philosophical 
exegesis that was premised on a holistic understanding of the pursuit of 
wisdom, in which hadith, scripture and metaphysical learning were raw 
materials for the instrument of the human intellect to discern, was highly 
influential and effective. Many disagreed, and to an extent al-Majlisī’s 
hostile response to the philosophical appropriation of hadith had precur-
sors in Mīrzā Rafīʿā Nāʾinī (d. 1082/1672), a philosopher who resisted a 
straightforward equation of the intellect as a faculty in the hadith with the 
philosophical account of an immaterial substance. Nāʾinī insisted that the 
hadith referred to a state in the soul that is capable of discerning good and 
evil in order to facilitate the person’s fulfilment of their moral obligation.146 
Some authors even attempted to combine the various positions and did 
not wish to adjudicate between them. This is the case of Muḥammad Hādī 
Shīrāzī (d. 1081/1670) and his eleven senses of the intellect that range from 
immaterial, higher celestial beings, to the immaterial human rational soul, 
the theoretical and the practical intellect, and the moral compass within 
the human.147 A more intriguing example is the little known eleventh-/
seventeenth-century figure Majdhūb-i Tabrīzī, the only commentator who  
extensively cites the positions of all the commentators before him but 
somewhat ironically (given his name, Majdhūb, which means ‘enraptured’ 
and suggests a Sufi state) was hostile to Sufi and philosophical interpreta-
tions of the nature of the intellect in the hadith; he cites Mullā Ṣadrā exten-
sively, but critically.148 To a large extent one might argue that al-Majlisī won 
the day – his commentary seems to be the most widely used and available 
today. Nevertheless, the commentary tradition on al-Kāfī demonstrates 
that the imprint of Mullā Ṣadrā’s holistic approach won adherents –  
145 For a discussion on this, see my ‘Neoplatonism Revised in the Light of the Imams’.
146 Nāʾinī, al-Ḥāshiya ʿalā uṣūl al-Kāfī, 41–43.
147 Shīrāzī, al-Kashf al-wāfī, 1:32–39.
148 Majdhūb-i Tabrīzī, al-Hadāyā, 1:194–196.
178 
SAJJAD RIZVI

  
THE WORDS OF THE IMAM  
179
and thinkers in the period continued to grapple with a central problem: 
how can one comment on scripture without imposing one’s learning and 
preconceptions on it? In what sense can exegesis avoid the temptations of 
eisegesis? In this sense, we might say that the philosophically and mysti-
cally inclined, as well as the more exoteric-minded, were unable to extricate 
themselves from the very act of interpretation. 
Bibliography
Afandī, ʿAbdallāh. Riyāḍ al-ʿulamāʾ wa-ḥiyāḍ al-fuḍalāʾ. Edited by Aḥmad 
al-Ḥusaynī. 6 vols. Qum: Maktabat Āyatullāh al-Marʿashī al-Najafī, 1981.
Ahmad, Saiyid Nizamuddin. ‘Twelver Šīʿī ḥadīṯ: From Tradition to Contemporary 
Evaluations.’ Oriente Moderno 82 (2002): 125–145.
al-ʿAlawī, Aḥmad. al-Ḥāshiya ʿalā uṣūl al-Kāfī. Edited by Ṣādiq Ḥusaynī Ashkiwarī. 
Qum: Dār al-Ḥadīth, 1387 Sh/2008.
al-ʿAlawī, Badr al-Dīn. al-Ḥāshiya ʿalā uṣūl al-Kāfī. Edited by ʿAlī al-Fāḍilī. Qum: 
Dār al-Ḥadīth, 1389 Sh/2010.
ʿAlī al-Riḍā. Fiqh al-Riḍā. Qum: Muʾassasat Āl al-Bayt li-Iḥyāʾ al-Turāth, 1406/ 
1986. 
ʿAlī al-Riḍā. al-Risāla al-Dhahabiyya: Il Trattato Aurea sulla medicina attribuito 
all’Imām ʿAlī al-Riḍā. Edited and translated by Fabrizio Speziale and Giorgio 
Guirini. Palermo: Officina di studi medievali, 2009.
ʿAlī al-Riḍā. Ṣaḥīfat al-Riḍā. Edited by Jawād Qayyūmī Iṣfahānī. Qum: Dalīl-i Mā, 
1373 Sh/1995.
al-ʿĀmilī, Bahāʾ al-Dīn. Arbaʿūna ḥadīthan li-Bahāʾ al-Dīn al-ʿĀmilī maʿ taʿlīqāt 
hāmma li-Muḥammad Ismāʿīl Māzandarānī Khājūʾī. Edited by Mahdī Rajāʾī. 
Qum: Muʾassasa-yi ʿĀshūrā, 1384 Sh/2005.
al-ʿĀmilī, Bahāʾ al-Dīn. Ḥāshiyat al-Faqīh. Edited by Fāris Ḥassūn. Qum: Makta-
bat Āyatullāh al-Marʿashī al-Najafī, 1382 Sh/2003.
al-ʿĀmilī, Bahāʾ al-Dīn. ‘al-Wajīza fī ʿilm al-dirāya.’ Edited by Mājid al-Gharbāwī. 
Turāthunā 32–33 (1413/1992): 389–439.
al-ʿĀmilī, al-Ḥusayn b. ʿAbd al-Ṣamad. Wuṣūl al-akhyār ilā uṣūl al-akhbār. Edited by 
ʿAbd al-Laṭīf Kuhkamaraʾī. Qum: Majmaʿ al-Dhakhāʾir al-Islāmiyya, 1401/1981. 
Amir-Moezzi, Mohammad Ali. The Silent Qurʾan & the Speaking Qurʾan. Trans-
lated by Eric Ormsby. New York: Columbia University Press, 2016.
al-Ardabīlī, Muḥammad b. ʿAlī. Jāmiʿ al-ruwāt. 2 vols. Qum: Maktabat Āyatullāh 
al-Marʿashī al-Najafī, 1403/1983.
Asatryan, Mushegh. Controversies in Formative Shiʿi Islam: The Ghulāt Muslims 
and their Beliefs. London: Tauris in association with the Institute of Ismaili 
Studies, 2017.
Astarābādī, Muḥammad Amīn. al-Ḥāshiya ʿalā uṣūl al-Kāfī. Edited by ʿAlī al-Fāḍilī. 
Qum: Dār al-Ḥadīth, 1387 Sh/2008.
Aʿẓamī, Muhammad Muṣṭafā. Studies in Early Hadith Literature. Indianapolis: 
Muslim Trust Publications, 1972.
al-Baḥrānī, ʿAbdallāh. ʿAwālim al-ʿulūm wa-l-maʿārif wa-l-aḥwāl min al-āyāt wa-l-
akhbār wa-l-aqwāl. 11 vols. Qum: Madrasat al-Imām al-Mahdī, 1404/1984.

 al-Baḥrānī, Maytham. Sharḥ Nahj al-balāgha. 5 vols. Repr. Qum: Daftar-i Tablīghāt-i 
Islāmī, 1362 Sh/1983. 
Bandy, Hunter. ‘Beyond a Mountain of Light: Niẓām al-Dīn Gīlānī and Shīʿī  
Naturalism between Safavid Iran and the Deccan.’ PhD dissertation, Duke 
University, 2019.
Bar-Asher, Meir. ‘The Qurʾān Commentary Ascribed to Imam Ḥasan al-ʿAskarī.’ 
Jerusalem Studies in Arabic and Islam 24 (2000): 358–379.
al-Barqī, Aḥmad. Kitāb al-Maḥāsin. Edited by Jalāl al-Dīn Ḥusaynī. Tehran: Dār 
al-Kutub al-Islāmiyya, 1370/1950.
al-Bursī, Ḥāfiẓ Rajab. Mashāriq anwār al-yaqīn fī asrār Amīr al-muʾminīn. Beirut: 
Muʾassasat al-Aʿlamī, 1971. 
al-Bursī, Ḥāfiẓ Rajab. Mashāriq anwār al-yaqīn fī asrār Amīr al-muʾminīn. Edited by 
ʿAbd al-Ghaffār Māzandarānī. Qum: Intishārāt al-Sharīf al-Raḍī, 1384 Sh/2005.
Cook, Michael. ‘The Opponents of Writing of Tradition in Early Islam.’ Arabica 
44 (1997): 437–530.
Dīmagār-Gurāb, Muḥsin. ‘Rivāyat-i Anā al-nuqṭa taḥta al-bāʾ dar tarāzū-yi naqd.’ 
ʿUlūm-i ḥadīs 77 (Pāyīz 1394 Sh/2015): 81–103.
Dirāyatī, Muṣṭafā (ed). Fihristvāra-yi dast-navisht-hā-yi Īrān (Dinā). 12 vols. 
Mashhad: Muʾassasa-yi farhangī u pazhūhishī-yi al-Jawād, 1389 Sh/2010.
Ehteshami, Amin. ‘The Four Books of Shiʿi Hadith: From Inception to Consoli-
dation.’ Islamic Law and Society 29 (2022): 225–279. Online: doi:10.1163/ 
15685195-28040002.
El-Shamsy, Ahmed. ‘Al-Ghazālī’s Teleology and the Galenic Tradition.’ In Frank 
Griffel (ed.), Islam and Rationality: Studies on al-Ghazālī, vol. 2, pp. 90–112. 
Leiden: Brill, 2016.
al-Fārābī, Abū Naṣr. Épître sur l’intellect (Risāla fī al-ʿaql). Edited and translated by 
Philippe Vallat. Paris: Les belles lettres, 2012.
al-Ḥasan al-ʿAskarī. al-Tafsīr al-mansūb ilā al-Imām al-ʿAskarī. Edited by 
Muḥammad Bāqir al-Abṭaḥī. Qum: Muʾassasat al-Imām al-Mahdī, 1433/2012. 
al-Ḥillī, Najm al-Dīn. Sharāʾiʿ al-islām fī masāʾil al-ḥalāl wa-l-ḥarām. 4 vols. Tehran: 
Intishārāt-i Istaqlāl, 1409/1989.
al-Ḥurr al-ʿĀmilī. Wasāʾil al-shīʿa. 17 vols. Qum: Muʾassasat al-Nashr al-Islāmī, 
1384 Sh/2005.
Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd. Sharḥ Nahj al-balāgha. Edited by Muḥammad Abū al-Faḍl 
Ibrāhīm. 20 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Jīl, 1987.
Ibn Abī Jumhūr al-Aḥsāʾī. Mujlī mirʾāt al-munjī fī al-kalām wa-l-ḥikmatayn wa-l-
taṣawwuf. Edited by Riḍā Yaḥyā Pūrfārmad. 5 vols. Beirut: Jamiʿat Ibn Abī 
Jumhūr al-Aḥsāʾī li-Iḥyāʾ al-Turāth, 2013.
Ibn Shahrāshūb. Maʿālim al-ʿulamāʾ. 4 vols. Najaf: al-Maṭbaʿa al-Ḥaydariyya, 1961.
Ibn Sīnā. al-Shifāʾ: al-nafs. Edited by Fazlur Rahman. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1959.
Ibn Ṭāwūs, Kashf al-muḥajja fī thamarat al-muhja. Edited by Muḥammad 
al-Ḥassūn. Qum: Bustān-i Kitāb, 1371 Sh/1992.
Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq. Kitāb al-Ihlīlijā bi-riwāyat Abī Muḥammad al-Mufaḍḍal ibn ʿUmar 
al-Juʿfī wa-bi-dhaylihi shurūḥ wa-taʿlīqāt al-ʿAllāma al-Majlisī. Edited by Qays 
al-ʿAṭṭār. Qum: Intishārāt-i Dalīl-i Mā, 1385 Sh/2006. 
180 
SAJJAD RIZVI

  
THE WORDS OF THE IMAM  
181
Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq. Kitāb al-Tawḥīd amlāʾahu ilā tilmīdhihi al-Mufaḍḍal ibn ʿUmar. 
Beirut: Dār al-Murtaḍā, 2010.
al-Jalālī, Muḥammad Riḍā. Tadwīn al-sunna al-sharīfa. Qum: Maktab al-Iʿlām 
al-Islāmī, 1413/1992. 
al-Jazāʾirī, Niʿmatallāh. Kashf al-asrār fī sharḥ al-istibṣār. Edited by Ṭayyib al-Jazāʾirī. 
3 vols. Qum: Muʾassasat Dār al-Kitāb, 1408/1988.
al-Jazāʾirī, Niʿmatallāh. Nūr al-anwār fī sharḥ al-Ṣaḥīfa al-sajjādiyya. Beirut: Dār 
al-Maḥajja al-Bayḍāʾ, 2000.
al-Kāfī, ʿAbd al-Ḥusayn. ‘Mafhūm-i ʿaql az dīdgāh-i dū shāriḥ-i uṣūl-i Kāfī.’ ʿUlūm-i 
ḥadīs 26 (Zamistān 1381 Sh/2003): 96–119.
Kāshānī, Muḥsin Fayḍ. ʿAyn al-yaqīn. Edited by Fāliḥ ʿAbd al-Razzāq al-ʿUbaydī. 2 
vols. Qum: Anwār al-Hudā, 1428/2007.
Kāshānī, Muḥsin Fayḍ. Maqāmāt al-qalb. Qum: Dhawī al-Qurba, 1426/2005.
Kāshānī, Muḥsin Fayḍ. al-Wāfī. 24 vols. Isfahan: Madrasat Amīr al-Muʾminīn, 
1430/2009.
Kaukua, Jari. ‘The Intellect in Mullā Ṣadrā’s Commentary on Uṣūl al-Kāfī.’ In Saiyid 
Nizamuddin Ahmad and Sajjad Rizvi (eds), Philosophy and the Intellectual Life 
in Shiʿah Islam, 158–183. London: Shiʿah Institute, 2017.
Khwānsārī, Muḥammad Bāqir. Rawḍāt al-jannāt fī tarājim al-ʿulamāʾ wa-l-sādāt.  
9 vols. Qum: Maktaba-yi Ismāʿīliyān, 1971.
Kohlberg, Etan. ‘al-Uṣūl al-arbaʿumiʾa.’ Jerusalem Studies in Arabic and Islam 10 
(1987): 128–166. 
al-Kulaynī, Abū Jaʿfar. al-Kāfī. Edited by Muḥammad Ḥusayn Dirāyatī. 15 vols. 
Qum: Dār al-Ḥadīth, 1387 Sh/2008.
Mahdawī-Rād, Muḥammad ʿAlī. Tadwīn al-ḥadīth ʿind al-shīʿa al-imāmiyya.  
Tehran: Hastī-Numā, 1394 Sh/2015. 
Majdhūb-i Tabrīzī, Muḥammad. al-Hadāyā li-shīʿat aʾimmat al-hudā. Edited by 
Muḥammad Ḥusayn Dirāyatī and Ghulām-Ḥusayn Qayṣariyya-hā. 4 vols. 
Qum: Dār al-Ḥadīth, 1389 Sh/2010.
al-Majlisī, Muḥammad Bāqir. Biḥār al-anwār al-jāmiʿa li-durar akhbār al-aʾimma 
al-aṭhār. 110 vols. Beirut: Dār Iḥyāʾ al-Turāth al-ʿArabī, 1983.
al-Majlisī, Muḥammad Taqī. Lawāmiʿ-yi ṣāḥibqirānī. 8 vols. Qum: Kitābfurūshī-yi 
Ismāʿīliyān, 1414/1994.
al-Majlisī, Muḥammad Bāqir. Mirʾāt al-ʿuqūl fī sharḥ akhbār Āl al-rasūl. 26 vols. 
Qum: Dār al-Kutub al-Islāmiyya, 1370 Sh/1991.
al-Majlisī, Muḥammad Taqī. Rawḍat al-muttaqīn fī sharḥ Man lā yaḥḍuruhu 
al-Faqīh. 20 vols. Qum: Dār al-Kitāb al-Islāmī, 1387 Sh/2008.
al-Majlisī, Muḥammad Taqī. Sharḥ al-Ṣaḥīfa al-sajjādiyya. Edited by ʿAlī al-Fāḍilī. 
Qum: Pazhūhishgāh-i Bāqir al-ʿUlūm, 1388 Sh/2009. 
Maybudī, Mīr Ḥusayn. Sharḥ-i dīwān mansūb bih Amīr al-muʾminīn. Edited by 
Ḥasan Raḥmānī and Sayyid Ibrāhīm Ashk-Shīrīn. Tehran: Mīrāth-i Maktūb, 
1379 Sh/2000.
Māzandarānī, Muḥammad Ṣāliḥ. Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī. Edited by ʿAlī ʿĀshūr. 20 vols. 
Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Tārīkh al-ʿArabī, 2008.
Mīr Dāmād. al-Rawāshiḥ al-samāwiyya. Edited by Ghulām-Ḥusayn Qayṣarīya-hā 
and Niʿmatallāh al-Jalīlī. Qum: Dār al-Ḥadīth, 1380 Sh/2001.

 Mīr Dāmād. Sharḥ al-Ṣaḥīfa al-sajjādiyya. Edited by Mahdī al-Rajāʾī. Isfahan: 
Maktabat Walī al-ʿAṣr, 1422/2001.
Mīr Dāmād. al-Taʿlīqāt ʿalā kitāb al-Kāfī. Edited by Mahdī al-Rajāʾī. Qum: 
Sayyid Jamāl al-Dīn Mīrdāmādī/Maktabat Āyatullāh al-Marʿashī al-Najafī, 
1403/1982. 
Nāʾinī, Rafīʿ al-Dīn. al-Ḥāshiya ʿalā Uṣūl al-Kāfī. Edited by Muḥammad Ḥusayn 
Dirāyatī. Qum: Dār al-Ḥadīth, 1387 Sh/2008.
Newman, Andrew. ‘Bāqir al-Majlisī and Islamicate Medicine II: the Risāla dha-
habiyya in the Biḥār al-anwār.’ In Mohammad Ali Amir-Moezzi et al. (eds), 
Le Shīʿisme imāmite quarante ans après: hommage à Etan Kohlberg, 349–361. 
Turnhout: Brepols, 2009.
Newman, Andrew. ‘The Recovery of the Past, Ibn Bābawayh, Muḥammad Bāqir 
al-Majlisī and Safawid Medical Discourse.’ Iran: Journal of the British Institute 
of Persian Studies 50 (2012): 109–127.
Pourjavady, Reza and Sabine Schmidtke. ‘An Eastern Renaissance? Greek Philoso-
phy under the Safavids (16th–18th Centuries ad).’ Intellectual History of the 
Islamicate World 3 (2015): 248–290.
Qāsimī, Raḥīm. Muḥaqqiq-i Majlisī. 2 vols. Qum: Majmaʿ al-Dhakhāʾir al-Islāmiyya, 
2015.
Quhpāʾī, ʿInāyatallāh. Majmaʿ al-rijāl. Edited by ḍiyāʾ al-Dīn Iṣfahānī. 7 vols. Isfa-
han: N.p., 1384/1964.
Qummī, Qāḍī Saʿīd. al-Arbaʿīniyyāt li-kashf anwār al-qudsiyyāt. Edited by Najafqulī 
Ḥabībī. Tehran: Mīrāth-i Maktūb, 1381 Sh/2002.
Qummī, Qāḍī Saʿīd. Sharḥ tawḥīd al-Ṣadūq. Edited by Najafqulī Ḥabībī. 3 vols. 
Tehran: Wizārat al-Thaqāfa wa-l-Irshād al-Islāmī, 1380 Sh/2001.
Rizvi, Sajjad. ‘Neoplatonism Revised in the Light of the Imams.’ In Peter Adamson 
(ed.), Classical Arabic Philosophy: Sources and Receptions, 177–208. London: 
The Warburg Institute, 2007.
al-Ṣadūq, Ibn Bābawayh al-Qummī. ʿIlal al-sharāʾiʿ. Edited by Muḥammad Ṣādiq 
Āl Baḥr al-ʿUlūm. Rept. 2 vols. Qum: al-Maktaba al-Ḥaydariyya, 1383 Sh/2004.
al-Ṣadūq, Ibn Bābawayh al-Qummī. Maʿānī al-akhbār. Edited by ʿAlī-Akbar 
Ghaffārī. Rept. Beirut: Dār al-Murtaḍā, 1979.
al-Ṣaffār al-Qummī. Basāʾir al-darajāt. Edited by Muḥammad Bāqir Abṭaḥī. Qum: 
Madrasat al-Imām al-Mahdī, 1431/2010.
al-Shahīd al-Awwal (I), Ibn Makkī al-Jizzinī. Dhikrā al-shīʿa ilā aḥkām al-sharīʿa. 2 
vols. Qum: Muʾassasat Āl al-Bayt li-Iḥyāʾ al-Turāth, 1419/1998.
al-Shahīd al-Thānī (II), Zayn al-Dīn al-ʿĀmilī. Rasāʾil al-Shahīd al-thānī. Edited by 
Riḍā Mukhtārī and Ḥasan Shāfiʿī. 5 vols. In Mawsūʿat al-Shahīd al-thānī. Qum: 
Markaz Iḥyāʾ al-Turāth, 1434/2013.
al-Shahīd al-Thānī (II), Zayn al-Dīn al-ʿĀmilī. al-Riʿāya fī ʿilm al-dirāya. Edited by 
ʿAbd al-Ḥusayn Muḥammad al-Baqqāl. Qum: Maktabat Āyatullāh al-Marʿashī 
al-Najafī, 1408/1988.
Shīrāzī, ʿAlī Khān Madanī. Riyāḍ al-sālikīn fī sharḥ Ṣaḥīfat Sayyid al-sājidīn.  
7 vols. Qum: Muʾassassat al-Nashr al-Islāmī, 1385 Sh/2006. 
Shīrāzī, Muḥammad Hādī. al-Kashf al-wāfī fī sharḥ uṣūl al-Kāfī. Edited by ʿAlī 
Fāḍilī. Qum: Dār al-Ḥadīth, 1387 Sh/2008.
182 
SAJJAD RIZVI

  
THE WORDS OF THE IMAM  
183
Shīrāzī, Muḥammad Shāh Dārābī. Riyāḍ al-ʿārifīn fī sharḥ Ṣaḥīfat al-Sājidīn. Tehran: 
Dār al-Uswa, 1421/2000. 
Shīrāzī, Mullā Ṣadrā. al-Ḥikma al-mutaʿāliya fī al-asfār al-ʿaqliyya al-arbaʿa. Edited 
by Muḥammad Khāminihī. 9 vols. Tehran: Intishārāt-i Bunyād-i Ḥikmat-i 
Islāmī-yi Ṣadrā, 1380–83 Sh/2001–4.
Shīrāzī, Mullā Ṣadrā. Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī. Edited by Riḍā Ustādī. 5 vols. Tehran: 
Bunyād-i Ḥikmat-i Islāmī-yi Ṣadrā, 1384 Sh/2005.
Shushtarī, Nūrallāh. al-Ṣawārim al-muhriqa fī naqd al-Ṣawaʾiq al-muḥriqa. Edited 
by Jalāl al-Dīn Ḥusaynī. Tehran: Chāpkhāna-yi Nahżat, 1367 Sh/1988.
al-Ṭūsī, Abū Jaʿfar. al-Istibṣār fī mā ikhtulifa min al-akhbār. Edited by ʿAlī-Akbar 
Ghaffārī. 4 vols. Rept. Qum: Dār al-Ḥadīth, 1380 Sh/2001.
al-Ṭūsī, Abū Jaʿfar. Tahdhīb al-aḥkām. Edited by ʿAlī-Akbar Ghaffārī. 10 vols. Rept. 
Tehran: Dār al-Kutub al-Islāmiyya, 1385 Sh/2006.
al-Uṣūl al-sittat ʿashar. Edited by Ḥasan Muṣṭafawī. Qum: Muʾassasat al-Nashr 
al-Islāmī, 1415/1994.
Vilozny, Roy. Constructing a Worldview: al-Barqī’s Role in the Making of Early Shīʿī 
Faith. Turnhout: Brepols, 2017. 

 
 PART II
Modern Recollections  
and Reimaginings

 
 CHAPTER 7
Contesting Ḥanafī Thought in a 
Twentieth-century Turkish  
Hadith Commentary
Susan Gunasti
In a widely circulated 2008 article the British Broadcasting Corporation 
(BBC) reported on a Turkish hadith project that promised to be ‘a rev-
olutionary reinterpretation of Islam’. This project, spearheaded by the 
Diyanet1 and intended to be a hadith compilation suitable for the modern 
period, was still in the works at the time of the BBC story, which invoked 
the ‘revolutionary nature’ of the project and claimed that the compilation 
would bring about the ‘reformation of Islam’.2 The Diyanet responded to 
the story in two ways: in the short term, its head issued an official statement 
to counter and reject the claims of the BBC article and, in the long term, it 
reissued (in 2019) an early republican (1923–1938) hadith project, a Turk-
ish translation entitled Sahih-i Buhari Muhtasarı: Tecrid-i Sarih Tercümesi 
(An Abridgement of Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī: A Translation of al-Tajrīd al-Ṣarīḥ), 
first published between 1928 and 1948.3 The ‘revolutionary’ hadith project 
 1 The Diyanet is a governmental department charged with regulating religious affairs; its 
jurisdiction and power was dynamic over the period covered in this chapter. For this 
reason, I maintain the Turkish for Diyanet. For the pre-1950 period, ‘Diyanet’ is com-
monly translated as ‘Directorate of Religious Affairs’, but after 1950, it was infelicitously 
translated by the Diyanet themselves as ‘Presidency of Religious Affairs’; on the nature 
of these changes, see Kara, Cumhuriyet Türkiyesi’nde bir Mesele Olarak İslam, 55–64. On 
the ‘Directorate of Religious Affairs’, s.v. ‘Diyanet İșleri Bașkanlığı,’ in Türkiye Diyanet 
Vakfı İslam Ansiklopedisi (hereinafter TDVİA), (particularly 455–456 on the history of its 
early years).
 2 Daniel Brown mentions this hadith project and the BBC report on it in his discussion 
of modern hadith reform efforts; Brown, ‘Reappraisal’, 315–316. 
 3 On the BBC report, see <http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/7264903.stm> (accessed 29 
April 2018). For the text of the response to the BBC, see <http://www.hikem.net/basin-
aciklamatr.pdf> (accessed 29 April 2018); for the Diyanet’s report about the completion 
of its publication of the reissue of the Babanzade–Miras hadith work, see <http://www.

 188 
SUSAN GUNASTI
was completed in 2011; work to reissue the early republican hadith transla-
tion project began at the end of 2012.4
This incident reflects the BBC’s and the Diyanet’s understanding (or 
lack of understanding) of the relationship between texts and religion. The 
BBC story betrays a Protestant understanding of religion and a Western 
attitude that if only Muslims had access to the proper texts Islam would be 
compatible with modernity. The BBC’s invocation of a reformation rein-
forces this textual attitude toward religion, an attitude that obscures the 
importance of the many vibrant religious cultures throughout the Muslim 
world; further, it overlooks the fact that while texts are important to its intel-
lectual tradition, Islam is more than its texts. The Diyanet’s defence, that is, 
its focus on an early republican project, is peculiar. With this response, the 
Diyanet sought to reassure its domestic audience by demonstrating that it 
was not embarking on a revision of the hadith, and that the Turkish state 
had already engaged in a similar compilation of the hadith for the modern 
period. The Diyanet invoked the authority of a twentieth-century text for 
its twenty-first-century project – the published hadith compilation made 
this continuity explicit – to assuage concerns about textual revisionism.5
In February 1925, the Turkish parliament approved a bill commis-
sioning translation of the Qur’an and hadith to create a new canon in the 
recently established Turkish republic in the wake of the dissolution of 
the Ottoman Empire. The hadith translation project utilised the hadith  
collections of al-Bukhārī, Muslim and al-Tirmidhī for the translation.6 
Parliament’s concern to commission these texts resulted from its desire to 
produce vernacular religious texts; this desire had been gaining momentum 
since the nineteenth century. The Diyanet managed the project and initially 
commissioned Babanzade Ahmet Naim (1872–1934) to translate the had-
ith and engaged two other men to translate and comment on the Qur’an 
(Mehmet Akif [d. 1936] and Elmalılı Muhammed Hamdi Yazır [d. 1942], 
respectively). The text that resulted from this commission, Sahih-i Buhari  
Muhtasarı: Tecrid-i Sarih Tercümesi (1928–1948), was based solely on the 
diyanet.gov.tr/tr/icerik/unlu-hadis-kitabi-sahih-i-buhari-muhtasari-tecrid-i-sarihin-yeni-
baskisinda-son-asamaya-gelindi/6855> (accessed 29 April 2018).
 4 For six years a commission worked on the newer hadith compilation that was the subject 
of the BBC report. The seven-volume work was first published in 2011 and has been 
reissued several times since. On the start date of the work on the reissue of the early 
republican hadith translation project, see Ez-Zebidi, Sahih-i Buhari Muhtasarı, 1:20.
 5 Komisyon, Hadislerle İslam, 1:42. 
 6 ‘İkinci Celse’, in Meclis-i Meb‘usan Zabıt Ceridesi 14 (year 2): 249–263. The debate was 
also summarised in ‘Yeni Bir Heyet-i İlmiye’, in Sebil’ür-Reşad 25, no. 640 (26 Șubat 
1341) [26 February 1925], 249–251. The focus of the discussion was on translating  
the Qur’an; the translation of the hadith collections was only a secondary concern; no 
rationale was provided for the selection of these particular works.

  
CONTESTING ḤANAFĪ THOUGHT 
189
work of al-Bukhārī. Babanzade died shortly after completing a draft of the 
third volume in 1934, at which point Kamil Miras (1875–1957) took over 
translation work on the project. Ultimately, the hadith compilation was 
more than a translation, it was a commentary described as a translation. In 
this chapter I use the translation of Babanzade and Miras as a vehicle with 
which to study hadith commentary in the late Ottoman and early republi-
can periods.
Selecting a Scholar
The state had a great interest in vernacular religious text projects; the 
Diyanet oversaw these types of projects. In this case, the Diyanet selected 
Babanzade as the translator, a choice that was a little surprising because, 
though he had an excellent reputation (surpassing that of many non-Arab 
Ottoman scholars) for his knowledge of Arabic, he was not a specialist in 
hadith. Though Babanzade’s publications included works of hadith, his 
main scholarly reputation derived from his knowledge of philosophy.
The real and perceived expertise of the author in the subject matter con-
tributes to the religious authority of the work. From a scholarly perspective, 
a better choice for the project would have been Babanzade’s contemporary, 
Muhammed Zahit Kevseri (Muḥammad Zāhid al-Kawtharī) (1879–1952), 
an Ottoman scholar who was foremost among hadith scholars in the Muslim 
world at the time. But the Diyanet was unlikely to choose Kevseri, who fled 
the empire before its collapse and eventually settled in Egypt (as did others 
from among the late Ottoman ʿulamāʾ). Over the course of his professional 
career in the late Ottoman period, Kevseri had run into conflict with those 
who emerged to lead the republic, thus, the leadership at the Diyanet, which 
was a governmental department, did not choose Kevseri for the task. 
Rather than choosing the most qualified individual for the task, it 
appeared that the Diyanet was treating this as a translation project. Though 
the Diyanet had reasons for making the decision it did, its emphasis  
on choosing a translator rather than a hadith specialist was in line with 
Ottoman approaches to hadith commentary. Much of the late Ottoman 
hadith commentary activity took place in translations rather than as line-
by-line explications, interlinear annotations or marginal annotations. The 
most prominent examples of this translation approach can be seen in the 
numerous translations of the forty hadith (arbaʿīn) collections, many of 
which were translations from Persian into Ottoman Turkish.7
Babanzade would have agreed that he was not a scholar of hadith on a 
par with Kevseri, but at the time he accepted this commission he had been 
working on translating hadith for nearly two decades. His contributions  
 7 Karahan, İslam-Türk Edebiyatında Kırk Hadis.

 to Ottoman hadith culture were important; apart from his many trans-
lations of hadith in journals, in 1925 he also translated Yaḥyā b. Sharaf 
al-Nawawī’s Arbaʿīn into Ottoman Turkish.8 He first began translating 
from Aḥmad b. Aḥmad al-Zabīdī’s (d. 893/1488) al-Tajrīd al-ṣarīḥ for the 
Islamic journals Sırat-ı Müstakim in 1910 and, after it ceased publication 
in 1912, in Kelime-i Tayyibe. In this regard, Babanzade was part of and 
contributed to the two prominent strands of Ottoman hadith culture with 
his translations from al-Bukhārī and of the forty hadith genre.9 Babanzade 
negotiated the position he found himself in – of not being an expert in had-
ith and yet having a strong interest in the corpus – by referring to himself 
as a mütercim (translator) in his hadith works.
Babanzade died in 1934 and the Diyanet sought a replacement to com-
plete the project. The Diyanet’s immediate need was to find someone to 
edit the incomplete draft of the third volume that Babanzade had sub-
mitted prior to his death. Miras was a high-ranking member of the late 
Ottoman ʿulamāʾ and had held many positions in the Istanbul madrasa 
system. He was a political veteran who did not have a reputation for his 
knowledge of hadith. However, at this point, the Diyanet must have been 
desperate to find a replacement for Babanzade. By 1935 – a decade after 
parliament approved the bill to commission vernacular religious texts – 
two of the three original men who had taken up commissions had dropped 
out (Akif by choice and Babanzade as a result of his death), and only two 
volumes of the hadith compilation and one volume of the Qur’an com-
mentary and translation project had been published. The leadership at  
the Diyanet faced pressure from the government to see progress on the 
publication of the works;10 this likely influenced their decision to hire 
Miras in the wake of Babanzade’s death. Miras, who had been a member of 
parliament in 1925 and had voted in favour of commissioning translations  
of the Qur’an and hadith, now found himself working on one of those very 
projects.
Hadith in the Late Ottoman Empire and the  
Early Turkish Republic
In the late Ottoman period the madrasa was an important venue for hadith  
education. In the hierarchical organisation of the Istanbul madrasa sys-
tem from the eleventh/seventeenth century to the reforms of 1914, there 
were twelve categories; the highest level for a madrasa teacher was that of 
 8 Babanzade, Kirk Hadis.
 9 I will elaborate on these two trends in a future work.
10 See <http://www.yenisafak.com/hayat/tefsiri-birak-turkce-meal-yaz-2654024> (accessed 
28 April 2018); the government sent a letter to pressure the Diyanet to publish the vernacu-
lar Qur’an commentary.
190 
SUSAN GUNASTI

 instructor at the Darü’l-hadis-i Süleymaniye.11 In the Ottoman madrasa  
system, Ḥasan b. Muḥammad al-Ṣaghānī’s (d. 650/1252) Mashāriq al-anwār 
al-Nabawiyya, Ḥusayn b. Masʿūd al-Baghawī’s (d. 510/1117 or 516/1122) 
Maṣābīḥ al-sunna, Muslim b. al-Ḥajjaj’s (d. 261/875) Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim and 
Muḥammad b. Ismāʿīl al-Bukhārī’s Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī, and commentaries  
on these works, were variously read in the study of hadith.12 And Ibn Ḥajar 
al-ʿAsqalānī’s al-Nukhbat al-fikr was one of the main texts used for the study 
of uṣūl al-ḥadīth among the Ottomans.13
In order to understand the study of hadith in the late Ottoman context 
and the making of hadith specialists (muḥaddiths), it is not enough to look 
at the madrasa curriculum because there were numerous opportunities to 
study hadith beyond the formal setting of the madrasa. For example, there 
was a tradition of live recitations of hadith at mosques.14 Libraries built 
in the twelfth/eighteenth century featured rooms specifically designated 
for hadith recitations.15 And, as further evidence of the vibrancy of hadith 
study outside the madrasa system, we find majālis in which hadith were 
also studied.16 The imperial palace was also a site for hadith study; in the 
reign of Sultan Abdülhamit II (r. 1876–1909), the Yıldız Palace (the vast 
11 In the Ottoman madrasa system there were three broad divisions: the madrasas of 
Istanbul, the madrasas of Edirne and Bursa (early capitals of the empire) and all the 
other madrasas. On the twelve levels of the twentieth-century Istanbul madrasa system, 
and the eleven levels of the eleventh-/seventeenth-century Istanbul madrasa system, 
see Uzunçarşılı, Osmanlı Devletinin İlmiye Teşkilatı, 271–272. In the twelfth/eighteenth 
century, a new level was introduced to the Istanbul system, but the highest level from 
the eleventh/seventeenth century onward remained the Darü’l-hadis-i Süleymaniye 
(est. 1557). In the twentieth century, the Edirne and Bursa madrasa systems were 
organised in the same way as that of Istanbul, with the Darü’l-hadis being the highest 
(see Uzunçarşılı, Osmanlı Devletinin İlmiye Teşkilatı, 273). The twelve-part division of 
the Istanbul madrasa system was in place from the twelfth/eighteenth century until the 
madrasa reforms of 1914. For a general overview of the Ottoman Darü’l-hadis, see Gül, 
Osmanlı Medreselerinde. On the Darü’l-hadis-i Süleymaniye, see Çiftçi, Süleymaniye 
Darulhadisi. 
12 Uzunçarşılı, Osmanlı Devletinin İlmiye Teşkilatı, 28–29.
13 On the role of Nukhbat al-fikr in the study of uṣūl al-ḥadīth among the Ottomans, see 
Sadık, ‘Osmanlı Devrinde’, 127–136.
14 Regarding recitations at mosques during the nineteenth century in Istanbul, see Kara-
cabey, ‘Osmanlı Madrasalerinin Son Dönemi’nde Hadis Öğretimi’, 165. For an example 
from late nineteenth-century Konya, see Sadık, ‘Les Lieux de L’Enseignement’, 11. 
15 On the construction of rooms specifically for hadith recitation at the Hagia Sophia and 
Fatih Libraries in twelfth-/eighteenth-century Istanbul, see Sezer, ‘The Architecture of 
Bibiliophilia’, 66 and 154 (respectively). This trend of library construction declined in 
the late nineteenth century (Sezer, ‘The Architecture of Bibiliophilia’, 264–266).
16 Al-Kawtharī, Maqalāt al-Kawtharī, 556–557. Kevseri provides several examples from 
the career of a renowned twelfth-/eighteenth-century scholar, Gelenbevi İsmail Efendi 
(d. 1791). He provides examples of various majālis that he and Muṣṭafā b. Muḥammad 
al-Safarjalānī (d. 1765) attended in the presence of leading officials.
 
CONTESTING ḤANAFĪ THOUGHT 
191

 complex that included the residences of the late Ottoman sultans) formally 
appointed a scholar to teach hadith from al-Bukhārī’s collection.17 Further-
more, informal scholarly networks were as important as formal pathways. 
In the education of Zahit Kevseri, who published his ijāza for his Egyp-
tian students’ reference, we observe how these trends came together. From 
this ijāza, we can gain valuable and detailed information about the study 
of hadith in the late Ottoman context.18 Kevseri was a typical late Ottoman 
scholar; he began his education in the provinces in his natal hometown 
of Düzce in northwestern Turkey under the tutelage of his father, a dis-
tinguished teacher, and then moved to Istanbul, where he continued his 
education and began his professional career. While in Istanbul, Kevseri 
was given instruction in both formal and informal settings; two teach-
ers in particular exerted a profound influence on his learning: Alasonyalı 
Ali Zeynelabidin Efendi (d. 1917) and Eğinli İbrahim Hakkı Efendi  
(d. 1894).19 From his ijāza, we know that he was authorised to transmit 
nearly twenty works relating to hadith: Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī (on Alasonyalı), 
Nukhbat al-fikr, Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim, Sunan Abī Dāwūd, Jāmiʿ al-Tirmidhī, 
Sunan al-Nasāʾī, Sunan Ibn Mājah, Musnad Abī Ḥanīfa, Masānīd Abī 
Ḥanīfa al-sabʿat ʿashara, al-Muwaṭṭaʾ, Musnad al-Shāfiʿī, Musnad Aḥmad, 
Maṣābīḥ al-sunna, Mashāriq al-anwār, Mishkat al-maṣābīḥ, al-Mawāhib, 
al-Shifāʾ,  al-Jāmiʿ al-kabīr and  al-Jāmiʿ al-ṣaghīr.20 From Kevseri’s exam-
ple, we know that the study of hadith was exhaustive and that it relied on 
instruction in informal networks, which were as important as the formal 
madrasa and its curriculum.
We have little information about the hadith education of the two trans-
lators of Sahihi-i Buhari Muhtasarı: Tecrid-i Sarih Tercümesi. Kamil Miras, 
who was born into a scholarly family, was a product of the madrasa system 
in which the study of hadith was part of the curriculum. He completed his 
studies in his hometown of Afyonkarahisar in western Turkey, after which 
he moved to Istanbul to continue his studies. We do not have details about 
his study of hadith outside the madrasa system, but we do know that during 
his studies in Istanbul he received an ijāza from Alasonyalı Ali Zeynelabidin 
Efendi, one of the two scholars who figured prominently in Kevseri’s hadith 
17 Mardin, Huzur Dersleri, 2:326–237. The position, held by Rizeli İshak Nuri Efendi  
(d. 1927), was terminated with the event of March 31 (24 April 1909). Thereafter, he was 
appointed to recite hadith from al-Bukhārī in the Meșihat.
18 Given the limited details we have about late Ottoman hadith culture, it is not surpris-
ing that many Turkish scholars have analysed Kevseri’s ijāza; see, for example, Özafșar, 
‘Osmanlı Eğitim’, and Ayaz, ‘Hadis İlimlerinin Tedrîsâtı’, 50–52.
19 Al-Kawtharī, al-Taḥrīr al-wajīz, 59. For another example of his study of Rāmūz 
al-aḥādīth with Kastamanolu Hasan Efendi in an informal setting, see al-Kawtharī, 
al-Taḥrīr al-wajīz, 60.
20 Al-Kawtharī, al-Taḥrīr al-wajīz, 11–15. The ijāza then goes on to works of fiqh, athbāt 
(confirmation) and then a selective biographical dictionary. 
192 
SUSAN GUNASTI

 education; presumably, Miras studied hadith with him, too.21 Miras com-
pleted his course of study, passed the qualifying exams (ruus imtihanları) in 
1907 and began his teaching career at the Beyazit Mosque. Over the course 
of his career, Miras taught on a range of subjects, including the history of 
jurisprudence, logic, the history of Islam and the history of religions. 
Despite Babanzade’s longstanding interest in hadith, we do not know 
anything about his education on the topic. We know that he began his stud-
ies in Baghdad, where he was born, and that he never attended a madrasa, 
so we cannot assume that he pursued a madrasa curriculum for the study 
of hadith. He came to Istanbul as a young man and continued his studies at 
Mekteb-i Sultani and later at Mekteb-i Mülkiye.22 In 1914, he began teach-
ing philosophy at Darü’l-Fünun, where he remained until the institution 
was closed in 1933. 
Babanzade studied hadith independently; we have no information 
about what and with whom he studied. As noted above, Babanzade’s earli-
est works of hadith translation were based on al-Zabīdī’s al-Tajrīd al-ṣarīḥ 
and published in Sırat-ı Müstakim and Kelime-i Tayyibe beginning in late 
1910. This journal ran for almost forty issues and covered approximately 
two hundred hadith in these two journals. Al-Zabīdī’s text was likely instru-
mental in helping Babanzade study hadith, as it was for other beginners. He 
wrote a letter to the journal, and this served as the preface to the first article 
of the hadith translation; in it, after explaining why he translated the had-
ith, Babanzade mentioned the state of the Muslim community. He believed 
that the journal could play an important role in awakening readers and fur-
ther, that for the Muslim community to improve its situation, it should be 
concerned with Qur’anic exegesis (tafsīr) and hadith. He pointed out the 
articles on tafsīr that Sırat-ı Müstakim published and singled out its publica-
tion of articles from İsmail Hakkı Bereketzade’s (d. 1918) Envar-i Kur’an in 
particular. Despite the importance of the Qur’an and hadith in the Islamic 
tradition, the journal published very little on hadith. Babanzade went on to 
state that he was not an expert in tafsīr or hadith but, in order to remedy 
the problem of the journal’s omission of articles on hadith, he could trans-
late and thus help readers. He said that he would translate from al-Zabīdī’s 
al-Tajrīd al-ṣarīḥ as he found the time.23 Babanzade’s explanation is striking 
for the way he situates his efforts on hadith in the context of calls for a ‘new 
tafsīr’ by invoking Bereketzade’s Qur’an commentary.24 And the fact that  
21 TDVİA, s.v. ‘Kamil Miras’, 145.
22 Ergin, ‘Babanzade Ahmed Naim’, 129.
23 Babanzade, ‘Sırat-ı Müstakim’, 257.
24 Bereketzade İsmail Hakkı wrote two partial Qur’an commentaries: Envar-i Kur’an, a 
learned work written for a scholarly audience, and Neca’ib-i Kur’aniye, a popular work 
for laypeople. Both works were partially published in serial form in Sırat-ı Müstakim. 
The publication of these works in the tafsīr section of the journal, and others on the topic 
 
CONTESTING ḤANAFĪ THOUGHT 
193

 Babanzade situates hadith at the heart of an Islamic revival aligns his hadith 
translation project with broader trends in the Muslim world, where the role 
of hadith in the period was being reappraised.25 Babanzade wanted to see 
hadith gain at least some of the attention that was being shown to rejuvenate 
the other disciplines of the Islamic sciences. 
In 1925, Babanzade published a translation of al-Nawawī’s Arbaʿīn. His 
strategy was to provide a literal translation of the original, with footnotes 
to provide extra information. It was in the space of the footnotes that he 
selectively provided commentary. Babanzade utilised this practice to pro-
vide information on topics that he thought needed clarification or attracted 
his interest. He continued this practice in the Sahih-i Buhari Muhtasarı: 
Tecrid-i Sarih Tercümesi as well. Since he never approached any of his had-
ith projects with the formal intention of commenting on a hadith text, he 
was free to skip over material that also may have needed clarification. He 
modestly presented himself as a translator of hadith, a role that also gave 
him the freedom to comment as much or as little as he wanted.
The two men who worked on Sahih-i Buhari Muhtasarı: Tecrid-i Sarih 
Tercümesi spent their formative intellectual years in Ottoman institu-
tions. Regarding the religious realm, the Ottoman Empire did not end 
abruptly with the establishment of the republic in 1923, rather, there was 
a great deal of continuity between the Ottoman Empire and the Turkish 
Republic in the religious realm. In the early years of the republic, Otto-
man religious works were still being read and taught. For example, Sahih-i 
Buhari Muhtasarı: Tecrid-i Sarih Tercümesi was the only work on hadith 
published under the imprint of the Diyanet until 1952, when a Turkish 
translation of ʿAlī al-Qārī’s (d. 1014/1605) al-Aḥādith al-qudsiyya was 
translated as Kırk Kudsi Hadis.26 The religious scholars who dominated the  
pre-1950s republican era had received their educational training in Otto-
man religious institutions and began their careers in those institutions. 
Though the state sought to severely curtail opportunities for religious  
education, individual members of the ʿulamāʾ remained and trained oth-
ers in the Islamic tradition through informal, personal networks. It was 
only after the Diyanet became stronger after the 1950 elections that more 
opportunities were available in Turkey for those seeking a systematic reli-
gious education; subsequently, new religious scholars trained in republican  
institutions emerged. The contributions of former members of the Otto-
man ʿulamāʾ and the slow emergence of new Muslim scholars were key  
of tafsīr, were related to Mehmet Akif’s call for a ‘new tafsīr’ in the inaugural article of 
the tafsīr section; for more on the ‘new tafsīr’, see Gunasti, The Qur’an, 65, 72. The rela-
tionship between the study of hadith and calls for a ‘new tafsīr’, ‘new theology’ and ‘new 
philosophy’ fall beyond the purview of this chapter, but need further exploring.
25 Brown, Rethinking Tradition.
26 Al-Qārī, Kırk Kudsi Hadis. 
194 
SUSAN GUNASTI

 factors that contributed to a continuity in the religious realm between the 
Ottoman Empire and the Turkish Republic.
Sahih-i Buhari Muhtasarı: Tecrid-i Sarih Tercümesi
We do not know why Babanzade chose to translate al-Zabīdī’s al-Tajrīd 
al-ṣarīḥ for his commission. All we know is that he had already begun a 
translation of it a little over two decades prior, in an effort to revitalise the 
Muslim community. Perhaps he still thought the text could serve this role. 
Or the overwhelming nature of the task of translating al-Bukhārī’s had-
ith compilation might have led him to prefer al-Zabīdī’s abridgement of it 
rather than the original. In any case, the text served the purposes of study 
for beginners and provided opportunities for commentators to interpret 
Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī. 
Even though the hadith project was commissioned as a vernacular 
translation for the public, the text was only accessible to specialists. One 
needed to know both Ottoman Turkish and Arabic to understand it. The 
first two volumes were published in 1928 in Ottoman Turkish; after the 
passage of the alphabet reform law of 1928 (which changed the alphabet 
from the Arabic-Ottoman script to Latin letters), the remaining volumes 
were published using Latin letters. Throughout the twelve volumes of the 
text, the chains of transmission and hadith reports are first provided in 
Arabic, followed by the translation (tercemesi) [sic]. Babanzade strove to 
provide a literal translation (harfiyyen tercemeye itina etmekle) but, where 
the translation warranted additional words to communicate the meaning 
of the original, he put the explanatory words in parentheses to indicate that 
they were not present in the original.27 The distinction between the transla-
tion and the original was clear from the page layout. 
The title page of the first volume contains the imprint indicating that it 
is an official publication of the Diyanet of the Turkish Republic (the fourth 
imprint to be published). The title of the book, Sahih-i Buhari Muhtasarı: 
Tecrid-i Sarih Tercemesi, is displayed prominently in large font, followed 
by the volume number and publication information (see Figure 7.1). The 
layout of the title page of the first volume presents the text as a translation: 
it does not mention the author of the Tajrīd (leaving specialists to infer 
al-Zabīdī’s authority) or the identity of the translator, Babanzade. This 
information is provided later, from the third volume onwards. The title 
page of the first volume is followed by what could be considered the preface 
of the book, in which Babanzade provides information on al-Zabīdī and 
Babanzade’s reasons for translating the book at the behest of the Diyanet. 
27 Babanzade, Sahih-i Buhari Muhtasarı: Tecrid-i Sarih Tercümesi (hereinafter SBM-TST), 
1:4–5.
 
CONTESTING ḤANAFĪ THOUGHT 
195

 Figure 7.1 Title page of volume 1 of the first edition of Sahihi-i Buhari 
Muhtasarı: Tecrid-i Sarih Tercümesi (1928); photograph provided courtesy 
of McGill Islamic Studies Library.
196 
SUSAN GUNASTI

 He does not mention his reasons for choosing al-Zabīdī’s al-Tajrīd al-ṣarīḥ 
for translation. At the end of the preface, we find ‘Translator: Ahmet 
Naim’.28 Thus, Bababzade’s personal authority is minimised, while the 
Diyanet is closely associated with the project. Writing commentaries is a 
means through which religious authority is constituted and preserved; we 
can view this text as a way to establish the authority of the Diyanet in the 
early republican period. 
Regarding writing commentaries, the choices ultimately fall to the indi-
vidual writers; here it is significant that Babanzade had different goals for 
the project than did the Diyanet. If the Diyanet intended to create a Turk-
ish canon and to minimise the relevance of the ʿulamāʾ, Babanzade was 
interested in pursuing a particular classical tradition of reading al-Bukhārī 
and had no interest in the concerns of the state. Babanzade, intentionally 
or not, subverted the goals of the Diyanet because he had complete control 
over the content of the work. 
The preface of the book is followed by a lengthy introduction that is close 
to five hundred pages long; this itself can be considered an independent 
work on uṣūl al-ḥadīth. In length, this introduction exceeds many works of 
this genre. The introduction positions the work in the context of premodern 
scholars, such as al-Zabīdī. In providing his sources for the introduction, 
the first text Babanzade identified was Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī’s Nukhbat  
al-fikr fī muṣṭalaḥ ahl al-athar, followed by Ibn Ḥajar’s commentary on it, 
Nuzhat al-naẓar, then followed by ʿAlī al-Qārī’s ‘commentary on the com-
mentary [of Ibn Ḥajar]’.29 Babanzade’s reliance on Ibn Ḥajar’s contribu-
tions to hadith extended beyond his use of Nukhbat al-fikr to Fatḥ al-Bārī  
fī sharḥ Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī, Ibn Ḥajar’s key work on reading al-Bukhārī.
Despite presenting the introduction as being grounded in Nukhbat al-
fikr, Babanzade departs from it and adds a great deal. One of his stated 
goals in the introduction was to offer a methodological explanation on how 
hadith could be understood in the twentieth century.30 He was very inter-
ested in methodology and in defending the methods of evaluating hadith. 
In one instance, he takes issue with the views of Leone Caetani (d. 1935), 
an Italian Orientalist who analysed and evaluated hadith based on histori-
cal critical methods and then rejected many hadiths that Muslims accepted 
as authentic. Babanzade defends the methodology of the ‘hadith folk’ (ahl 
al-ḥadīth) against Caetani by emphasising their different motivations for 
28 Babanzade, SBM-TST, 1:6.
29 Babanzade, SBM-TST, 1:n.p. (the page follows immediately after p. 482). In addition to 
these three, he lists nineteen other sources that he also consulted by name. On the Nukh-
bat al-fikr and its commentaries and ʿAlī al-Qārī’s work, see Engin, ‘Hadis Literatüründe 
Hâşiyeler’, 76–98 and 84–85 respectively.
30 I am building on the observation made by his close friend, Muallim Mehmed Cevdet; 
Cevdet, Müderris Babanzade Ahmed Naim, 56–57.
 
CONTESTING ḤANAFĪ THOUGHT 
197

 evaluating hadith. Babanzade considered the hadith folk historians and 
their methods more comprehensive than the historical critical approach 
of modern historians. This was due, he said, to their objectives; historians 
like Caetani sought to clarify the historical record, whereas hadith folk had 
to be meticulous in evaluating hadith because accepting a hadith report 
as valid could influence the practice of religion, and therefore the stakes 
were higher.31 Babanzade’s goal was to preserve the methodology of isnād  
criticism, but also to leverage the method to different ends than classical 
hadith scholars.
From the very outset of the project, commentary on the hadith was an 
integral part of Babanzade’s work. Babanzade explains that he found a ‘bare 
translation’ (kuru bir terceme) insufficient and therefore it was necessary 
to add a commentary.32 In this regard, he said that he would try to provide 
alternative transmissions and other differences to the extent that he could. 
Yet, rather than dedicating a separate section to commentary, Babanzade’s 
commentary appears in the footnotes that sometimes dominate the page. 
This choice of the page layout (we do not know whose choice it was) affected 
the religious authority of the text by downplaying the prominence of the 
commentary. In addition, Babanzade’s commentary was not systematic; 
rather it included alternative narrations, information about transmitters 
and elaborations on themes that piqued his interest. In the commentary 
tradition, it is the exegete’s prerogative to determine which parts he dwells 
on and which ones he ignores. Babanzade’s commentary is less systematic  
in its presentation than that of Miras, which has a uniform presentation.
As noted, Babanzade died early in the project; the third volume was 
in draft form, and still required editing. The Diyanet assigned the editing 
project to Kamil Miras, who edited the third volume and preserved 
Babanzade’s text. He formally took over the translation work of the project 
with the fourth volume, at which point he made changes to Babanzade’s 
approach and page layout. For example, he changed the section labelled 
tercemesi (translation) to Türkçesi (Turkish); the change in labels is 
notable, given the prominent discussions about translations in the early 
republican period.
Miras made a significant change in the layout of the book. He provided 
a section labelled izahı (elucidation), in which he provided his commentary 
on the hadith. By designating a formal section for the commentary on each 
hadith, he shifted the location of the commentary from the footnotes to the 
body of the text. He began this section with a discussion of the transmitters 
of the hadith, then focused on issues raised in the hadith report, informa-
tion on the narrators and other topics. Sometimes, he provided a separate 
31 Babanzade, SBM-TST, 1:74–81.
32 Babanzade, SBM-TST, 1:5.
198 
SUSAN GUNASTI

 section for biographical information, or about the legal implications of the 
hadith. Thus, under Miras, the commentary on the hadith reports acquired 
more prominence.
The addition of this information transformed the work from a trans-
lation project into a full-fledged hadith commentary; this change was 
reflected in an addition to the title (ve șerhi [and its commentary]). For 
the commentary, Miras first refers to al-Bukhārī’s Ṣaḥīḥ to explain hadith 
and then consulted al-ʿAynī’s ʿUmdat al-qārī fī sharḥ Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī, a 
commentary on al-Bukhārī’s Ṣaḥīḥ.33 The reference to Badr al-Dīn al-ʿAynī 
(d. 855/1451), a prominent Ḥanafī jurist in the Mamlūk period, signalled 
Miras’s desire to avoid what he perceived to be Babanzade’s Shāfiʿī bias. 
Miras’s choice was interesting because, as a Ḥanafī, he was clearly cham-
pioning al-ʿAynī’s interpretation over Babanzade’s strong preference for 
the interpretations of Ibn Ḥajar, a Shāfiʿī scholar (Babanzade was himself 
a Shāfiʿī). Thus, the rivalry of the two classical scholars, al-ʿAynī and Ibn 
Ḥajar, manifested itself in the modern period.34 In the pages of this twen-
tieth-century commentary, we observe Miras and Babanzade drawing on 
different strands of the classical hadith commentary tradition that were in 
tension with one another; in this sense, they contested madhhab identity 
through their commentaries on al-Bukhārī.
Contestations over Religious Authority
The third volume of Sahih-i Buhari Muhtasarı: Tecrid-i Sarih Tercemesi is 
of particular interest because it is the only volume on which both Babanzade 
and Miras worked; in a sense, it was a one-sided monologue from Miras 
to Babanzade. In a few instances, Miras praised Babanzade’s approach 
to the text,35 but on other occasions he was very critical of it. Miras cau-
tiously approached the task of correcting what he deemed points of error in 
Babanzade’s commentary. Rather, he left Babanzade’s original in the text, 
but provided his comments, criticisms and/or clarifications to these points 
in the notes. Miras explained that, in instances where he believed Baban-
zade had erred, he provided interpretations and/or translations that align 
with the Ḥanafī school.36 One trend emerges particularly from Miras’s 
33 Miras, SBM-TST, 4:8.
34 On the rivalry between Ibn Ḥajar and al-ʿAynī, see Blecher, Said the Prophet of God, 
57–79 and 100–108. On the invocation of their respective works in the context of 
scholarly rivalries in the context of the twentieth-century Indian subcontinent, see 
Blecher, Said the Prophet of God, 153. I thank Joel Blecher for drawing my attention  
to the parallels between the Turkish and Indian cases.
35 Babanzade and Miras, SBM-TST, 3:100, in which Miras praises Babanzade’s discussion 
of multiple narrations for a report.
36 Babanzade and Miras, SBM-TST, 3:n.p. (the text is between pages 403 and 404). 
 
CONTESTING ḤANAFĪ THOUGHT 
199

 edits; namely, he found Babanzade too partisan in his legal school affili-
ation. The intensity with which Miras criticised Babanzade on this point 
is surprising given that legal school boundaries were not an issue for the 
Diyanet at the time. But at the same time, in the modern period there were 
broader contestations over hadith commentary in which we observe com-
mentators adopting the views of scholars of the same legal school.37 In this 
regard, the third volume is important to understanding competing notions 
of religious authority with respect to Babanzade and Miras championing 
their particular readings of al-Bukhārī (along madhhab lines).
Miras expressed his differences with Babanzade through his portrayal 
of al-ʿAynī’s commentary. For example, Miras interjected notes to refer to 
al-ʿAynī’s opinion on the matter under discussion, to make clear that the 
Ḥanafīs carefully discussed the matter in their hadith works. In some places, 
Miras defends al-ʿAynī from what he perceived to be Babanzade’s misinter-
pretations of al-ʿAynī’s positions. We can see an example of this in the discus-
sion of a hadith related to the Battle of the Trench (al-khandaq) in which 
Muhammad commanded the believers not to start the afternoon prayer until 
they had reached their destination; some obeyed and others did not: 
When Muḥammad, peace be upon him, returned from the confeder-
ates [who fought at the Battle of the Trench], he said to us that no 
one is to pray the afternoon prayer (ʿasr) until reaching the Banū 
Qurayẓa. While on the path [to the Banū Qurayẓa], some encoun-
tered [the issue of when to pray the prayer]. Some from among them 
said that they would not pray until they reached their destination. 
Others among them said that they would pray and that this is not 
what was being asked of them [i.e. not to pray ʿasr].38 
After providing alternative transmission reports, Babanzade states that 
this hadith report does not belong in the section to which al-Bukhārī assigns 
it, abwāb ṣalāt al-khawf (chapters of the prayer of fear), because it does not 
deal with prayer in times of fear. However, he justifies al-Bukhārī’s placement 
by linking the topic to that of the preceding one, relating to praying while on 
foot or mounted when one is outnumbered by enemies. Babanzade’s discus-
sion enabled him to focus on the previous report and on whether it is per-
mitted to pray while mounted rather than to consider the specifics related 
to the one about the Battle of the Trench. The point of contention relates to 
Babanzade’s reports of the views of al-ʿAynī on praying while mounted and 
37 On the Diyanet’s reaching out, in 1937, to a Ḥanafī scholar for a fatwā on divorce 
according to a classical Ḥanbalī school, see <http://www.yenisafak.com/hayat/diyanetle-
elmalilinin-fetva-tartismasi-2654917> (accessed 15 April 2018). On hadith, see Blecher, 
Said the Prophet of God, 153 and Zaman, ‘Commentaries, Print, and Patronage’. 
38 Babanzade and Miras, SBM-TST, 3:144.
200 
SUSAN GUNASTI

 in a dangerous situation.39 In a footnote, Miras quotes al-ʿAynī extensively to 
claim that Babanzade misrepresented his position because he did not read 
al-ʿAynī’s commentary on the topic thoroughly.40 Miras’s aim was to defend 
al-ʿAynī’s reputation against Babanzade’s censure. 
We see Miras’s interest in preserving the reputation of al-ʿAynī in 
another minor instance later in the text. In the translation of a hadith, 
Babanzade notes a discrepancy in the chain of transmission. It is unclear 
what source text he is using for al-Bukhārī’s hadith, but Babanzade notes 
that the chain of transmission incorrectly includes the name of ʿUthmān, 
one of the rightly guided caliphs. Even though the chain of transmission 
includes a name it should not, Babanzade reproduces it in the text. In the 
comment on the translation, he attributes the error to al-ʿAynī’s text. In a 
footnote, Miras notes that an Egyptian publication from 1348/1929–1930 
did not include the name of ʿUthmān in the chain of transmission. With 
this correction, Miras indicated that the problem was in the text that 
Babanzade consulted and not with al-ʿAynī.
Miras’s frustration with Babanzade’s representation of al-ʿAynī’s views 
appears in a long footnote in which he counters what he perceived to be 
Babanzade’s attempts to criticise al-ʿAynī.41 The topic in this case relates to 
ṣalāt al-witr, a prayer performed after the night prayers; whether it is com-
pulsory is contested among the various legal schools. According to the con-
sensus of the Ḥanafīs, ṣalāt al-witr is considered compulsory, though some 
of the school’s followers consider its performance a matter of Sunna and thus 
not compulsory.42 In the commentary on the hadith report, ‘the Prophet, 
peace by upon him, said that you should establish al-witr as your last prayer 
of the evening’, Babanzade brings up the obligatory nature of ṣalāt al-witr 
for the Ḥanafīs by referring to al-ʿAynī’s commentary.43 He alludes to differ-
ences of opinion on this hadith; some view it as a Ḥanafī position and others 
disagree. Al-ʿAynī vehemently critiques those who do not view it as a Ḥanafī 
position. Babanzade describes al-ʿAynī’s defence, and mentions that al-ʿAynī 
cites another hadith report that states: ‘one who does not pray witr is not 
from among us.’ Babanzade notes that this hadith is a particularly strong one 
to make the Ḥanafī case but that al-ʿAynī does not interpret it in a particu-
larly compelling manner. Babanzade accuses al-ʿAynī of misinterpreting this 
hadith because in fact he misunderstood what it means and says the hadith 
means ‘they are not from among those who act according to our Sunna’.44 
39 Babanzade and Miras, SBM-TST, 3:149.
40 Cf., Babanzade and Miras, SBM-TST, 3:149 and al-ʿAynī, ʿUmdat al-qārī, 6:262–263.
41 Babanzade and Miras, SBM-TST, 3:225–226.
42 TDVİA, s.v. ‘Vitir Namazı’.
43 Babanzade and Miras, SBM-TST, 3:223.
44 Cf. Babanzade and Miras, SBM-TST, 3:225 and al-ʿAynī, ʿUmdat al-qārī, 7:12. Miras 
does a better job of reporting on what al-ʿAynī wrote in ʿUmdat al-qārī.
 
CONTESTING ḤANAFĪ THOUGHT 
201

 Miras objects to Babanzade’s criticism of al-ʿAynī and accuses Babanzade of 
being overly partisan with respect to madhhabs (mezheb taassubunun izlerini 
görüyor). The irony of this comment is not lost on readers who have noted 
Miras’s madhhab partisanship throughout his translation. Yet the comment 
also raises the issue that was at stake for Miras, who was frustrated by Baban-
zade’s portrayal of al-ʿAynī and the suggestion that al-ʿAynī and the Ḥanafīs 
were not strong in hadith commentary. The Ḥanafīs were relative latecomers 
to hadith studies and, by defending al-ʿAynī, Miras was upholding the Ḥanafī 
tradition of hadith interpretation in the twentieth century.
Another issue that emerges between Miras and Babanzade is their differ-
ing views on narrators. In a lengthy footnote in his introduction, Babanzade 
defends Nūḥ b. Abī Maryam Abū ʿIsma al-Marwazī (d. 173/789), a Ḥanafī 
scholar who was known to fabricate hadith reports. Babanzade defends this 
maligned Ḥanafī scholar from the second/eighth century in order to make 
a larger point about Ḥanafīs and hadith scholarship. Babanzade mentions 
that misperceptions about Nūḥ b. Abī Maryam’s role as a hadith transmit-
ter were so entrenched that even Ḥanafī scholars such as ʿAlī al-Qārī and 
ʿAbd al-Ḥayy Laknawī (d. 1304/1886) did not correctly judge Nūḥ b. Abī 
Maryam as a reliable narrator. Babanzade’s critique of prominent Ḥanafī  
scholars was a criticism of them as being weak in hadith.
After rehearsing the breadth of Nūḥ b. Abī Maryam’s learning and 
scholarly reputation, Babanzade brings up the forged report in which Nūḥ 
b. Abī Maryam, upon seeing people reading works of fiqh by Abū Ḥanīfa 
and works of maghāzī by Ibn Isḥāq, speaks about the excellent qualities 
(faḍāʾil) of the Qur’an. Babanzade focuses on the use of ‘on the authority 
of’ (ʿan) in one of the narrations of this report (Nūḥ b. Abī Maryam on the 
authority of ʿIkrima [d. 107/725] on the authority of Ibn ʿAbbas). The use 
of ‘on the authority of’ is generally considered a less authoritative mode 
of transmission than ‘was transmitted to us’ (ḥaddathanā), and in this 
instance the use of ‘on the authority of’ in one of the chains of transmission 
leaves the particular mode by which the hadith was transmitted as ambigu-
ous.45 Babanzade then brings up another variation of the hadith that places 
an unknown individual (rajul) between Nūḥ b. Abī Maryam and ʿIkrima 
in the chain of transmission, and the transmission of this fabricated report 
is attributed to this unknown individual. With this step he clears Nūḥ b. 
Abī Maryam’s name, and then Babanzade proceeds to mention the ways 
in which some hadith scholars have relied on Nūḥ b. Abī Maryam’s trans-
mission of hadith. Babanzade argues that, given that others have relied on  
Nūḥ b. Abī Maryam with respect to other hadith reports and because of  
his legal reputation, his narrations should be accepted.46 
45 Blecher, Said the Prophet of God, 100.
46 Babanzade, SBM-TST, 1:276–279.
202 
SUSAN GUNASTI

 In a similar vein, Babanzade also defends the reputation of Muḥammad 
b. ʿUmar al-Wāqidī (d. 207/823), a historian who wrote about early cam-
paigns.47 The hadith folk (ahl al-ḥadīth) took issue with al-Wāqidī’s loose 
approach to hadith. Babanzade went back to the sources and reevalu-
ated the reputation of the narrators and accepted their transmissions as 
valid. Though Babanzade establishes a compelling defence of al-Wāqidī, 
his defence illustrates the late Shahab Ahmed’s point that different genres 
have different methods and standards for evaluating and using hadith 
reports. Babanzade invokes al-Wāqidī’s good reputation in the maghāzī 
genre, but conflates this good reputation to the realm of hadith. Baban-
zade ignored the different standards in the genres and, once he defended 
al-Wāqidī in the realm of history, surreptitiously sought to transfer that 
good standing from history to al-Wāqidī’s reputation in the realm of  
hadith and its transmission.48
Miras, too, sought to defend Nūḥ b. Abī Maryam’s reputation, but 
for different reasons and with different strategies.49 Babanzade’s critique 
of Ḥanafī scholars was not lost on Miras. Miras begins by providing the 
full hadith report in Arabic and then analyses the chain of transmission. 
He focuses on the use of ‘on the authority of’ in the chain of transmission 
and the introduction of the report with ‘it was said’ (qīla), highlighting the 
problem, namely, that the narrator remains ambiguous or unknown. He 
focuses on the disparity between the death dates of Nūḥ b. Abī Maryam 
and ʿIkrima (173/789 and 107/725, respectively), and notes the other nar-
ration that places an unknown individual between the two. Based on these 
two narrations, it is unclear from whom Nūḥ b. Abī Maryam narrated the 
hadith; Miras argues that the hadith report is weak because it is forged, 
though not by Nūḥ b. Abī Maryam. Significantly, Miras goes further than 
Babanzade and says that those close to Nūḥ b. Abī Maryam attributed this 
report to him and that it is unimaginable that Nūḥ b. Abī Maryam, who was 
a disciple of Abū Ḥanīfa, would ever say anything bad about his teacher, as 
this report implies. Miras sought to defend Nūḥ b. Abī Maryam’s reputa-
tion, and beyond that, to preserve the reputation of Abū Ḥanīfa. Despite 
their differences, Miras shared Babanzade’s modernist approach to the 
reevaluation of chains of transmission. 
In his concluding remarks to his introduction we get a sense of Baban-
zade’s reasons for rehabilitating the reputations of Nūḥ b. Abī Maryam 
and al-Wāqidī. Babanzade writes that one of the main reasons he went  
47 Babanzade, SBM-TST, 1:481–482.
48 On the standards adopted by scholars in evaluating hadith reports in various genres in 
early Islam, see Ahmed, Before Orthodoxy.
49 On Babanzade’s defense, see SBM-TST, 1:277–279 and 481. On Miras’s refutation, see 
Babanzade and Miras, SBM-TST, 3:405–407. Later editions of the work also published 
Miras’s refutation in the first volume.
 
CONTESTING ḤANAFĪ THOUGHT 
203

 into such a detailed discussion about the criteria for evaluating hadith was 
to show how, from the early Islamic period, Muslims – unlike any other 
religious community – subjected knowledge to strict criteria.50 Babanzade 
adopted an all-encompassing approach that enabled him to incorporate 
the broad range of views held by Muslims. The lengthy introduction, with 
its painstaking efforts to show how hadith are evaluated, was meant to 
show that the Muslim world had internal standards by which to evaluate 
knowledge, and that these methods surpass those in the West.51 The intro-
duction can be seen as a reaction to arguments current at the time; these 
views presented the Muslim world as a civilisation in decline and encour-
aged the adoption of European disciplines and modes of learning.
Conclusion
The Turkish state’s efforts to publish vernacular translations and com-
mentaries on the two most important sources of scriptural authority in 
Islam demonstrates, as I have shown in this chapter, that the state was 
not indifferent to the practice of Islam in the early republican era. The 
commentary tradition and genre have their own style and expectations, 
and although individual authors had freedom within the constraints of 
the genre, they still had to work within these parameters. Although the 
state may have initially thought that it could dictate the terms of the book 
project, its goals ran into the considerable autonomy that Babanzade and 
Miras had over the project. Babanzade and Miras approached the inter-
pretation of al-Bukhārī’s Ṣaḥīḥ unfettered by the state and its interests. 
The Diyanet’s inability to dictate the content of the texts it commissioned 
meant that the state could not play a role in shaping Islam in textual sources 
in the early republican period. The Diyanet, and by extension the state, 
could not control the final shape of the translation project they commis-
sioned because they depended on scholars writing from within the hadith  
commentary tradition. 
Under Babanzade, the project became an effort to reorient understand-
ings of hadith methodology contra the evaluations of classical scholars and 
to serve as the basis of a revival of the Islamic intellectual tradition vis-à-vis 
the impact of European learning. In this regard, he was not alone in view-
ing hadith as a vehicle for religious reform and demonstrating to those 
who viewed Islam as an obstacle to progress that the Islamic tradition had 
internal standards for evaluating knowledge, standards that exceeded those 
of the Europeans. Miras, by contrast, had a more limited goal; he sought to 
50 Babanzade, SBM-TST, 1:480.
51 Babanzade makes this point in his text on the study of Arabic; see Cemil and Babanzade, 
Sarf-ı Arabi, 1:3.
204 
SUSAN GUNASTI

 limit Babanzade’s championing of Ibn Ḥajar, which he interpreted as com-
ing at the expense of al-ʿAynī’s influence and the Ḥanafī legal school more 
broadly. This dynamic mirrored similar trends in hadith commentary in 
other parts of the Islamic world at the time, including the Indian subcon-
tinent. Miras transformed the third volume into a contestation over the 
authority of al-ʿAynī and Abū Ḥanīfa. The work of Babanzade and Miras, 
when taken together, demonstrates the range of interpretive debates over 
hadith, the tensions that animated these issues in early republican Turkey, 
and the commentarial opportunities that the medium of the translation 
afforded in defining and redefining the meanings of the sayings and prac-
tices of Muhammad.
Bibliography
Ahmed, Shahab. Before Orthodoxy: The Satanic Verses in Early Islam. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 2017.
Ayaz, Kadir. ‘Hadis İlimlerinin Tedrisatı Açısından Osmanlı Darulhadisleri.’ 
Osmanlı Araştırmaları / Journal of Ottoman Studies 47 (2016): 39–68.
al-ʿAynī, Badr al-Dīn. ʿUmdat al-qārī fī sharḥ Saḥīḥ al-Bukhārī. 25 vols. Beirut: 
Idarat al-Tabāʿa al-Muniriyya, 1970.
Babanzade, Ahmet Naim. Kirk hadis: İtikadan, Amelan, Ahlakan İnsanlara Reh-
ber-i Kemalat Olacak Cevami ül-Kelam Ahmadiyeden. Istanbul: Matbaa-i 
Amire, 1343/1925.
Babanzade, Ahmet Naim. Sahihi-i Buhari Muhtasarı: Tecrid-i Sarih Tercümesi. 
Vols. 1–2. Istanbul: Evkaf Matbaası, 1928.
Babanzade, Ahmet Naim. ‘Sırat-ı Müstakim Ceride-i İslamiyesi Müessis-i 
Muhteremesine.’ Sebil’ür-Reşad 5, no. 120 (9 Kanunıevvel 1326) [22 December 
1910]: 257–258.
Babanzade, Ahmet Naim and Kamil Miras. Sahihi-i Buhari Muhtasarı: Tecrid-i 
Sarih Tercümesi. Vol. 3 Istanbul: Matbaai Ebüzziya, 1934.
Babanzade, Ahmet Naim and Kamil Miras. Sahih-i Buhari Muhtasarı: Tecrid-i 
Sarih Tercümesi ve Șerhi. 8 vols. Ankara: Diyanet İșleri Bașkanlıǧı, 2019.
Blecher, Joel. Said the Prophet of God: Hadith Commentary across a Millennium. 
Oakland: University of California Press, 2018.
Brown, Daniel W. ‘Reappraisal.’ In Daniel W. Brown (ed.), The Wiley Blackwell 
Concise Companion to the Hadith, 315–333. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and 
Sons, 2020.
Brown, Daniel W. Rethinking Tradition in Modern Islamic Thought. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Cemil, Mustafa and [Babanzade] Ahmed Naim. Sarf-ı Arabi: Temrinat. 3rd ed. 
Istanbul: Ibrahim Hilmi Matbaası, 1323 [/1907].
Cevdet, [Muallim] Mehmed. Müderris Babanzade Ahmed Naim. Edited by Fahret-
tin Gün. Istanbul: Beyan, 2016.
Çiftçi, Mehdin. Süleymaniye Darulhadisi (XVI–XVII. Asırlar). Istanbul: Kitabevi, 
2013.
 
CONTESTING ḤANAFĪ THOUGHT 
205

 Engin, Sezai. ‘Hadis Literatüründe Haşiyeler: Nuhbetü’l-fiker ve Nüzhetü’n-
nazar Üzerine Yapılan Haşiye Çalışmaları Bibliyografyası.’ Hadis ve Siyer 
Aramaștırmaları 1, no. 1 (2015): 76–98.
Ergin, Osman Nuri. ‘Babanzade Ahmed Naim, Şahsiyeti ve Eserleri.’ In Muallim 
Mehmed Cevdet, Müderris Babanzade Ahmed Naim, edited by Fahrettin Gün. 
Istanbul: Beyan, 2016.
Gül, Ahmet. Osmanlı Medreselerinde Eğitim-Öğretim ve Bunlar Arasında Daru’l-
Hadislerin Yeri. Ankara: Türk Tarih Kurumu, 1997.
Gunasti, Susan. The Qur’an Between the Ottoman Empire and the Turkish Republic. 
Abingdon: Routledge, 2019.
‘İkinci Celse.’ Meclis-i Meb‘usan Zabıt Ceridesi 14 (year 2): 249–263. 
Kara, İsmail. Cumhuriyet Türkiyesi’nde bir Mesele Olarak İslam. Istanbul: Dergah 
Yayınları, 2009.
Karacabey, Salih. ‘Osmanlı Madrasalerinin Son Dönemi’nde Hadis Öğretimi.’ 
Uludağ Üniversitesi İlahiyat Fakültesi Dergisi 8, no. 8 (1999): 149–169.
Karahan, Abdülkadir. İslam-Türk Edebiyatında Kırk Hadis: Toplama, Tercüme ve 
Șerhleri. Istanbul: İbrahim Horoz Basımevi, 1954.
al-Kawtharī, Muḥammad Zāhid al-Ḥasan. Maqalāt al-Kawtharī. Cairo: al-Maktaba 
al-Azhariyya li-l-Turāth, 1414/1994.
al-Kawtharī, Muḥammad Zāhid al-Ḥasan. al-Taḥrīr al-wajīz fīmā yabtaghīh 
al-mustajīz. Aleppo: Maktabat al-Maṭbuʿāt al-Islāmiyya, 1993.
Komisyon. Hadislerle İslam. 7 vols. Ankara: Diyanet İşleri Başkanlığı, 2013.
Mardin, Ebül’ula. Huzur Dersleri. 2 vols. Istanbul: İsmail Akgün Matbaası, 1956–1966. 
Miras, Kamil. Sahih-i Buhari Muhtasarı: Tecrid-i Sarih Tercümesi ve Șerhi. Vols. 
4–12. Istanbul: Matbaai Ebüzziya, 1938–1948.
Özafșar, Mehmet Emin. ‘Osmanlı Eğitim, Kültür ve Sanat Hayatında Hadis.’ In Hasan 
Celal Güzel et al. (eds), Türkler, 11:356–369. Ankara: Türkiye Yayınları, 2002.
al-Qārī, ʿAlī. Kırk Kudsi Hadis. Translated by Hasan Hüsnü Erden. Istanbul: 
Diyanet, 1952.
Sadık, Cihan. ‘Les Lieux de L’Enseignement de la Tradition et L’Importance 
Donne A La Science du Hadis A L’Epoque Ottomane’ [sic]. Ondokuz Mayis 
Üniversitesi İlahiyat Fakültesi Dergisi 3 (1989): 1–41.
Sadık, Cihan. ‘Osmanlı Devrinde Türk Hadiscileri Tarafından Yazılan Usulü Hadis 
Eserleri, Risaleleri ve Nühbetü’l-Fiker Üzerine Yapılan Șerh ve Tercümeler.’ 
Atatürk Üniversitesi İslami İlimler Fakültesi Dergisi 1, no. 1 (1975): 127–136.
Sezer, Yavuz. ‘The Architecture of Bibiliophilia: Eighteenth-Century Ottoman 
Libraries.’ PhD dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2016.
Uzunçarşılı, İsmail Hakkı. Osmanlı Devletinin İlmiye Teşkilatı. Ankara: Türk Tarih 
Kurumu Basimevi, 1965.
Zaman, Muhammad Qasim. ‘Commentaries, Print, and Patronage: Hadith and 
the Madrasas in Modern South Asia.’ Bulletin of the School of Oriental and 
African Studies 62, no. 1 (1999): 60–81.
Ez-Zebidi, Zeynüddin Ahmed b. Ahmed b. Abdillatif [al-Zabīdī, Zayn al-Dīn 
Aḥmad b. Aḥmad b. ʿAbd al-Laṭīf]. Sahih-i Buhari Muhtasarı – Tecrid-i Sarih 
Tercümesi ve Șerhi. Translated by Ahmet Naim Babanzade and Kamil Miras. 8 
vols. Istanbul: Diyanet İșleri Bașkanlıǧı, 2019.
206 
SUSAN GUNASTI

 CHAPTER 8
Debating Authority and Authenticity 
in Modern South Asian Hadith 
Commentaries: Muḥammad Zakariyyā 
Kāndhalawī’s Awjaz al-masālik
Ali Altaf Mian*
Introduction
In colonial India the hadith commentary genre saw a considerable rise  
in popularity among Muslim scholars, some of whom produced multi-
volume works as a demonstration of their religious authority and authen-
ticity.1 This textual production coincided with a growing pedagogical 
investment in hadith in Indo-Muslim madrasas and the formation of new 
sectarian identities that continue to inform creedal distinctions and ritual 
differences among South Asian Muslims in the subcontinent but also in 
the diaspora.2 The sectarian orientations (masālik) of late nineteenth-
century India – the Ahl-i Ḥadīth, Deobandīs and Barelvīs – have deep 
historical roots.3 The Deobandī and Barelvī division over the meaning of 
divine sovereignty and the theological status of the Prophet Muhammad 
arguably crystallised competing Indian responses to the classical mystical 
theologian Ibn ʿArabī (d. 638/1240).4 Likewise, the colonial-era conflicts 
 * I would like to thank Joel Blecher, Ramon Harvey, Ebrahim Moosa and Muhammad 
Rafeeq Shinwari for their feedback on earlier versions of this chapter.
 1 See Zaman, ‘Commentaries, Print and Patronage’; Zaman, The ʿUlama in Contempo-
rary Islam; Blecher, Said the Prophet of God. See also Karagözoğlu, ‘Commentaries’, 
164; Qureshi, ‘Reform’. 
 2 For an in-depth discussion of various, and often overlapping, rationalist and tradition-
ist trends in South Asian madrasa cultures, especially over the last two hundred years, 
see Moosa, What is a Madrasa?
 3 Much has been written on these sectarian orientations. For a salient overview, see 
Malik, Islam in South Asia, 397–401. 
 4 See Tareen, Defending Muḥammad. Tareen helpfully demonstrates the centrality of 
‘divine sovereignty’ and the theological status of the Prophet Muhammad in the divi-
sive polemics between the Deobandīs and Barelvīs. Yet, he does not contextualise their 
differences on these two issues in relation to the South Asian reception history of Ibn 

 208 
ALI ALTAF MIAN
between the Deobandīs and Barelvīs (both Ḥanafīs) on the one hand, and 
Ahl-i Ḥadīth scholars (South Asia’s ‘indigenous Salafī community’5) on 
the other hand, evoke earlier debates between ‘reason-based jurists’ and 
‘transmission-based jurists’.6 
These intra-Muslim sectarian orientations also reflected the politi-
cal and social realities of British India. The use of modern technologies 
(print and steam) allowed scholars to project their religious authority and 
the authenticity of their interpretive communities in unprecedented ways. 
Ḥanafīs and Salafīs also responded to the colonial division of social life into 
the private sphere of religious and domestic life versus the public order of 
secular reason and governance.7 This meant that many religious authori-
ties concentrated their revivalist and reformist efforts in certain seemingly 
depoliticised textual and institutional spaces (communal magazines and 
newspapers, the home, mosques, madrasas and Sufi lodges). This parti-
tioning process had its own critics among colonial-era Muslims who called 
for unity and labelled jurisprudential differences the cause of Muslim 
political decay. This diagnosis in turn reflected the reformist and revivalist 
trends of the twelfth/eighteenth century across Muslim-majority societies.8 
Some scholars, however, resisted this diagnosis. For example, the Indo-
Muslim historian Shiblī Nuʿmānī (1857–1914) argued that jurisprudential 
differences arise out of various legitimate reasons, such as changing social 
circumstances and competing approaches to legal hermeneutics.9 Muslims  
ʿArabī. This contextualisation remains a desideratum in the scholarship on South Asian 
Islamic discursive traditions. For reference to this argument, see Malik, Islam in South 
Asia, 400. 
 5 I follow Zaman here in referring to Ahl-i Ḥadīth scholars as ‘Salafīs’: ‘South Asia has 
its indigenous Salafi community, commonly known as the Ahl-i Hadith – a designation 
that underscores their desire to be guided by the Islamic foundational texts, the Qur’an 
and the hadith-reports attributed to the Prophet Muhammad, rather than the norms 
of the medieval schools of law’ (Zaman, Modern Islamic Thought, 40). On the Ahl-i 
Ḥadīth movement, see Siyālkōtī, Tārīkh-i Ahl-i Ḥadīth; Riexinger, Sanaʾullah Amritsari; 
Riexinger, ‘A Study of the Ahl-i Hadīs’; Riexinger, ‘Ibn Taymiya’s Worldview’; Preckel, 
‘Ahl-i Ḥadīth’; Daniel W. Brown, ‘Reappraisal’, 319–321. See also Mian, 'South Asian 
Salafism’. For Amritsarī, see also al-Ḥasanī, Nuzhat al-khawāṭir, 8:105–106. 
 6 Jonathan Brown, The Canonization of al-Bukhārī and Muslim. Melchert uses the terms 
‘traditionist-jurisprudents’ and ‘rationalistic jurisprudents’ to refer to the fuqahāʾ aṣḥāb 
al-ḥadīth and the aṣḥāb al-raʾy, respectively (Melchert, ‘Traditionist-Jurisprudents’). 
See also Goldziher, The Ẓāhirīs, 3–5; Nuʿmānī, Sīrat-un-Nuʿmān, 141–142; Schacht, The 
Origins of Muhammadan Jurisprudence. 
 7 Numerous scholars have documented and analysed the colonialist division of social 
life into private religiosity and public secularity. For a recent, nuanced account, see 
Stephens, Governing Islam. 
 8 On this, see Dallal, Islam without Europe. 
 9 For his biography, see Sayyid Sulaymān Nadwī, Ḥayāt-i Shiblī; Muḥammad Akram 
al-Nadawī, Shiblī Nuʿmānī; al-Ḥasanī, Nuzhat al-khawāṭir, 8:189–191.

  
DEBATING AUTHORITY AND AUTHENTICITY  
209
can keep their perspectival and practical differences, he further argued, and 
still collaborate on their communal interests. Thus, unity and difference 
were not necessarily mutually exclusive investments.10
This chapter turns to the hadith commentary genre to describe and 
critically analyse how Muslims in colonial India navigated the question 
of unity and difference vis-à-vis jurisprudential differences. This genre 
is salient for addressing this question, since many such differences arise 
directly out of divergent, if not always contradictory, reports about the 
Prophet’s normative teaching and practice. Commentators thus seek to 
‘demonstrate the conformity of their reasoning with the Prophet’s teach-
ings’11 and to posit their commentaries as a ‘useful means of endorsing 
legal and theological positions in addition to providing a convenient 
ground to interpret and neutralize problematic traditions’.12 In colonial 
India, both Ḥanafī and Salafī scholars cultivated authority and claimed 
authenticity by turning to the hadith commentary genre. In this chapter 
I examine this point by concentrating on a commentary on the Muwaṭṭaʾ 
of Mālik b. Anas (d. 179/796), authored by the Deobandī Ḥanafī scholar 
Muḥammad Zakariyyā Kāndhalawī.13
Kāndhalawī (1898–1982) was at once a Sufi master, hadith professor and 
Ḥanafī jurist.14 His writings on hadith include a series of Urdu books on 
the ‘virtues of good deeds’, which preachers affiliated with the transnational 
missionary organisation, Tablīghī Jamāʿat, use as pedagogical texts.15 This 
organisation was founded in the late 1920s in North India by Kāndhalawī’s 
10 Nuʿmānī, Maqālāt-i Shiblī, 1:220–229. 
11 Karagözoğlu, ‘Commentaries’, 165.
12 Karagözoğlu, ‘Commentaries’, 165. 
13 On Mālik and his approach to jurisprudence, see Abd-Allah, Mālik and Medina. 
14 There are many sources for his biography, including his own multi-volume autobiogra-
phy: Kāndhalawī, Āp bītī. For an analysis of this text, see Metcalf, ‘The Past in the Pres-
ent’. See also al-Kumillāyī, al-Budūr al-maḍiyya, 8:41–60; Sayyid Abū al-Ḥasan Nadwī, 
Sawāniḥ Ḥaz̤ rat Shaykh al-Ḥadīth; Nadwī, Zikr-i Zakariyyā; al-Nadawī, al-Muḥaddith 
al-kabīr; Sahāranpūrī, Ḥayāt-i Shaykh; Naqshbandī, Shaikh al-ḥadīth Ḥaẓrat Mawlānā 
Muḥammad Zakariyyā.
15 There is considerable scholarship on the Tablīghī Jamāʿat. For general overviews,  
see Masud (ed.), Travellers in Faith; Sikand, The Origins and Development of the  
Tablighi-Jama‘at. Kāndhalawī’s ‘books of virtues’ (kutub-i Faz̤ āʾil) document and dis-
cuss reports about the virtues of good deeds, such as ‘virtues of prayer’ (faz̤ āʾil-i namāz), 
‘virtues of remembrance of God’ (faz̤ āʾil-i ẓikr), and so on. They were later collected 
in a single volume entitled, Tablīghī niṣāb, or ‘preachers’ curriculum’, and are now 
published as Faz̤ āʾil-i aʿmāl. See Kāndhalawī, Faz̤ āʾil-i aʿmāl. For an analysis, see Met-
calf, ‘Living Hadith’. For his answer to the criticism directed at this body of work, see 
Kāndhalawī, Kutub-i faz̤ āʾil. For his defense of the Tablīghī Jamāʿat, see Kāndhalawī, 
Tablīghī Jamāʿat. He also authored a hagiography of the Sufi saints of the Chishtī order 
(Kāndhalawī, Tārīkh-i mashāʾikh-i Chisht).

 paternal uncle, Muḥammad Ilyās Kāndhalawī (1885–1944).16 Muḥammad 
Zakariyyā Kāndhalawī also authored a tract on the ‘differences of the jurists’, 
and a voluminous work on Muḥammad b. Ismāʿīl al-Bukhārī’s ‘chapter 
headings’ (abwāb).17 His most extensive scholarly contribution, however, 
is the Awjaz al-masālik ilā Muwaṭṭaʾ Mālik (lit., ‘the most abridged path 
to Mālik’s Muwaṭṭaʾ’).18 Note that the use of the word masālik in the title 
alludes to the intra-Muslim polemical context of colonial India. The Awjaz 
is a massive commentary on the Muwaṭṭaʾ that is comparable in depth and 
breadth to those compiled by the Andalusian scholars Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr  
(d. 463/1071) and Abū al-Walīd al-Bājī (d. 474/1081).19 Kāndhalawī was 
occupied with the work from 1926 to 1956, and since the late 1950s numer-
ous editions have been published in South Asia and the Middle East.20 
The Awjaz defends the Ḥanafī tradition by balancing ‘content-based’ 
(matn or dirāya) and ‘transmission-based’ (isnād or riwāya) forms of criti-
cism. Kāndhalawī differed from his contemporaries – both Ḥanafīs and 
Salafīs – who focused their commentaries on the third-/ninth-century 
Sunnī hadith canon.21 Thus, the Awjaz shifts the terms of the debate from a 
canon whose compilers are rather critical of reason-based jurisprudence to 
a second-/eighth-century text whose contents and modes of transmission  
are more consistent with the Ḥanafī tradition.22 Kāndhalawī navigates  
differences with a reverential comportment (adab), emphasising to his  
16 On him, see Sayyid Abū al-Ḥasan Nadwī, Sawāniḥ Ḥaz̤ rat Mawlānā Muḥammad Ilyās 
Kāndhalawī; Haq, The Faith Movement; Hermansen, ‘Said Nursi and Maulana Ilyas’. 
17 Kāndhalawī, Ikhtilāf al-aʾimma; Kāndhalawī, The Differences of the Imāms; al-Kāndhalawī, 
al-Abwāb wa-l-tarājim. For his Urdu and Arabic commentaries on al-Bukhārī’s Ṣaḥīḥ, see 
Kāndhalawī, Taqrīr-i Bukhārī Sharīf; al-Kāndhalawī, al-Kanz al-mutawārī.
18 Al-Kāndhalawī, Awjaz al-masālik. There is scant scholarship in Urdu on this hadith 
commentary. See Farmān and Iqbāl, ‘Awjaz al-masālik’.
19 Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, al-Istidhkār; Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, al-Tamhīd; al-Bājī, al-Muntaqā. 
20 Al-Kāndhalawī, Awjaz al-masālik, 15:382. For the publication history of the commen-
tary, see Sahāranpūrī, Fihrist-i Taʾlīfāt-i Shaykh, 1:35–36.
21 See al-Kashmīrī, Fayḍ al-Bārī; al-ʿUthmānī, Fatḥ al-mulhim; al-Sahāranfūrī, Badhl 
al-majhūd; Shams al-Ḥaqq al-ʿAẓīmabādī and Sharaf al-Ḥaqq al-ʿAẓīmabādī, ʿAwn 
al-maʿbūd; al-Mubārakfūrī, Tuḥfat al-aḥwadhī.
22 As Brown explains, ‘The Ḥanafī school . . . constituted the bulk of the reason-based 
school to which the transmission-based scholars remained in steadfast opposition. Just 
as Ḥadīth scholars like al-Bukhārī and al-Ḥākim had condemned Ḥanafīs for depart-
ing from the Prophet’s true sunna, so did the Ḥanafīs like Abū Muṭīʿ Makḥūl al-Nasafī  
(d. 318/930) consider the ahl al-ḥadīth brainless literalists, capable of merely parroting 
the Prophet’s words but not of understanding his message’ (Jonathan Brown, The Can-
onization of al-Bukhārī and Muslim, 237). Deobandī scholars, however, sought to pacify 
and reconcile the conflict between early Ḥanafī luminaries and hadith scholars such 
as al-Bukhārī. See Taqī al-Dīn Nadwī, Muḥaddithīn-i ʿiẓām, 161–162. See also Ṣafdar, 
Maqām-i Abī Ḥanīfa. For a more critical assessment by a non-Deobandī colonial-era 
Indo-Muslim scholar, see Nuʿmānī, Sīrat-un-Nuʿmān, 138–140.
210 
ALI ALTAF MIAN

  
DEBATING AUTHORITY AND AUTHENTICITY  
211
contemporaries the advantages of embracing the legal pluralism that is 
immanent in the traditional law schools. While adab permits him to display 
his loyalty to the tradition and to claim an ‘aura of authenticity’, it allows the 
critical reader to observe the role played by tact and deference in neutralis-
ing contradictions and disagreements. Kāndhalawī also copiously cites from 
and builds on earlier hadith and jurisprudential sources and engages with 
the four Sunnī schools of law, as well as the extinct law schools. This fea-
ture of the Awjaz enables readers to discern how commentators construct 
authority and claim authenticity. 
In the context of the hadith commentary genre, authority and authen-
ticity are mutually constitutive and the Prophet Muhammad’s norma-
tive teaching (Sunna) serves as a vintage source of both. Scholars such as 
Kāndhalawī cultivated religious authority by claiming that their beliefs 
and actions were authentic imitations of the Sunna. Yet claiming to be an 
authoritative representative of the Sunna is not merely contingent on intel-
lectual exertion and personal piety. Such claims are realised within social 
rubrics of recognition and scales of value and are connected to sociopoliti-
cal privileges. Joel Blecher thus emphasises the methodological necessity 
of attending to ‘lived experience, power, and interpretive excellences’ while 
studying the hadith commentary genre.23 Thus, we should examine how 
Kāndhalawī’s commentary on Mālik’s Muwaṭṭaʾ reflects his aesthetic and 
ethical sensibilities and how he deployed the honed interpretive strategies 
of a broader discursive tradition to intervene in polemics between Indian 
Ḥanafīs and Ahl-i Ḥadīth/Salafī scholars. 
I argue that in the Awjaz Kāndhalawī deploys both ‘content-based 
criticism’ (ʿilm al-dirāya) and ‘narration- or transmission-based criticism’ 
(ʿilm al-riwāya) to elaborate on contradictions in reports and differences 
in legal doctrines.24 This elaboration in turn justifies the necessity of legal 
reasoning (and therefore the soundness of the traditional law schools). 
Kāndhalawī’s deployment of this interpretive strategy gives us the impres-
sion that he turns to the Muwaṭṭaʾ in the footsteps of an earlier Indo- 
Muslim hadith scholar, Shāh Walī Allāh of Delhi (1114–1176/1703–1762).25 
Yet here we must be careful not to conflate their overlapping but distinct 
approaches. Unlike Walī Allāh, Kāndhalawī is not interested in using 
the Muwaṭṭaʾ to reconcile intra-Sunnī differences in the service of eluci-
dating a unified, capacious approach to the normative order. Rather, his 
interpretive strategy of using contradictions and differences enables him 
to simultaneously display his interpretive excellence and to defend the 
23 Blecher, Said the Prophet of God, 15. 
24 For an exposition of ʿilm al-dirāya and ʿilm al-riwāya on the part of an Indo-Muslim 
scholar, see Nuʿmānī, Sīrat-un-Nuʿmān, 166–178. 
25 On Shāh Walī Allāh, see Baljon, Religion and Thought; Jalbani, Life of Shāh Waliyullāh. 

 Ḥanafī tradition. I provide evidence for my argument by considering how 
he interprets two legal controversies related to manual movement: Does 
touching the penis invalidate ritual purity? Should one raise one’s hands 
to the shoulders before and after bowing in prayer? These were two of the 
many seemingly minor differences that animated public debates and textual  
contestations between Ḥanafīs and Salafīs in colonial India (and continue 
to do so today).26 
Before proceeding further, note the structure of what follows. I begin 
by discussing Shāh Walī Allāh’s eclectic vision, especially in relation to 
his engagement with Mālik’s Muwaṭṭaʾ. I also illuminate how Deobandīs 
and Salafīs generally resist Walī Allāh’s vision. In the next section I furnish 
readers with a biographical portrait of Kāndhalawī and a discussion of the 
Awjaz. I then offer two close readings that provide evidence for my argu-
ment; I also contrast Kāndhalawī’s commentary style with that of his pre-
decessor, Walī Allāh, and his contemporary Salafī scholar, ʿAbd al-Raḥmān 
Mubārakpūrī (d. 1935).27 In the conclusion I pursue some open-ended 
ideas and questions about the significance of the hadith commentary genre 
for understanding modern intra-Muslim contestations of authority and 
authenticity.
Subtle Resistances
It is tempting to overemphasise Salafī and Deobandī Ḥanafī scholars as 
competing intellectual heirs of Shāh Walī Allāh of Delhi, since most of 
them trace their hadith authorisations back to the Prophet Muhammad 
through Walī Allāh. This singular framing, however, conceals some signifi-
cant nuances. Salafīs and Deobandīs draw inspiration from a diverse set of 
scholars and texts to fashion their discursive and social trajectories. Two 
examples suffice to illustrate this point: Walī Allāh does not appear in the 
Sufi genealogies of Deobandī scholars and the Ahl-i Ḥadīth scholars also 
draw on reformist theologians such as the Yemeni scholar Muḥammad 
b. ʿAlī al-Shawkānī (c. 1173–1255/1760–1839).28 To posit Salafīs and 
Deobandīs as competing intellectual heirs of Shāh Walī Allāh also obfus-
cates their critical, albeit deferential, reactions to his reconciliation of  
26 Other key debates between South Asian Ḥanafīs and Salafīs concern the recitation  
of Sūrat al-Fātiḥa (Q. 1) in the prayer, the audible recitation of ‘amen’ by the con-
gregants in the prayer and the issue of triple divorce (in which Salafīs hold that a  
husband pronouncing the divorce three times at once does not irrevocably termi-
nate the marriage, while Ḥanafīs maintain that doing this does nullify the marriage 
contract).
27 For a biographical account, see Nawshahrawī, Tarājim ʿulamāʾ, 401–407; al-Ḥasanī, 
Nuzhat al-khawāṭir, 8:259–260. 
28 On him, see Haykel, Revival and Reform in Islam; Dallal, Islam without Europe. 
212 
ALI ALTAF MIAN

  
DEBATING AUTHORITY AND AUTHENTICITY  
213
some of the divergent tendencies of Muslim discursive traditions. I will 
disentangle this point in some detail, since it directly relates to why 
Kāndhalawī wrote a commentary on Mālik’s Muwaṭṭaʾ. 
Shāh Walī Allāh was born during the last years of Emperor Aurang-
zeb’s reign and saw first-hand some of the splendour and glory of the 
Mughal imperium. Yet Walī Allāh also witnessed the destruction of Delhi 
in 1151/1739 by the armies of the Persian ruler Nādir Shāh (d. 1160/1747). 
The waning of Mughal sovereignty perturbed Walī Allāh but it also encour-
aged him to think afresh about political change and its relationship to reli-
gious thought and practice.29 He also agonised over the disagreements of 
the jurists, viewing their divergent methodologies and interpretations as 
signs of an incoherent epistemological foundation. He approached these 
two problems – what he saw as his discursive tradition’s disharmony and 
the political order’s fragility – in a single analytical framework. His pro-
posed solution was a complex moral theology that was also an idealistic 
political manifesto.30 This solution seeks to bridge the epistemological gaps 
between the material world and metaphysical reality, paying special atten-
tion to what he calls the ‘supports of civilisation’ (al-irtifāqāt). As was true 
for Ibn ʿArabī before him, Walī Allāh saw the daily actions of the Prophet 
Muhammad as the material manifestations of an imaginal unity.
How do the canonical law schools fit into this picture? Walī Allāh 
takes aim at the uncritical conformity to the law schools and argues that 
each Muslim must learn the wisdom behind the divine norms (sharīʿa). 
For him, most Muslims fail to connect the dots between their meta-
physical doctrines and their daily actions. For their part, learned reli-
gious authorities such as jurists often fail to educate the masses about 
the higher objectives of the sharīʿa. He argues, as a result, that most 
Muslims do not see the alignment between the immanent and the tran-
scendent. Without the ability to see this alignment, practitioners find 
it hard to grasp how minor rituals, such as raising the hands in prayer, 
secure worldly benefit and otherworldly bliss.31 Walī Allāh elucidates 
the secrets of the sharīʿa in a hadith-based framework, since he consid-
ers hadith to be the noblest of the Islamic sciences. He claimed to have 
received divine inspiration pointing him in the direction of Mālik’s 
Muwaṭṭaʾ.32 This mystical experience merged with his sharp analytical 
skills and afforded him the confidence to interpret the normative order 
in an original way. 
29 Zaman, ‘Political Power, Religious Authority, and the Caliphate’.
30 Al-Dihlawī, Ḥujjat Allāh al-Bāligha; al-Dihlawī, Shah Wali Allah of Delhi’s Hujjat Allah 
al-Baligha. 
31 See Dallal’s account in Islam without Europe, 245–274. 
32 Al-Dihlawī, al-Musawwā, 1:17.

 Walī Allāh proposes that Mālik’s Muwaṭṭaʾ can help Muslims resolve 
their jurisprudential differences: 
My heart expanded and I gained certainty about the Muwaṭṭaʾ being 
the most authentic book on the face of the Earth after the book of 
God [the Qur’an]. Likewise, it became clear to me that the path to 
sound and independent reasoning (ijtihād) and the acquisition of 
jurisprudential understanding (fiqh) is blocked in this epoch except 
through a single approach, namely, to concentrate on the Muwaṭṭaʾ, 
and to interpret its interrupted reports (marāsīl) based on knowledge 
acquired from the sayings of the Companions and the Successors.33 
Note that Walī Allāh does not encourage a literalist reading of prophetic 
texts. Instead, he upholds the necessity of legal reasoning and ‘the method 
outlined by the master jurists’,34 which includes ‘specifying the meanings  
of words and synthesising the proof texts by clarifying the various elements, 
prerequisites, and etiquette [of normative practices]’.35 Here, he empha-
sises attending to both the isnād (chains of narration) and the matn (con-
tent) in hadith interpretation, thus forecasting one of the main reformist 
attitudes toward hadith in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.36 Walī 
Allāh proposes a middle path between adhering to what he deemed time-
transcending interpretive methods and time-bound particular legal doc-
trines and positions. His reformist agenda is summed up in his statement 
that ‘this method implies that ijtihād remains a collective obligation for 
each generation [of Muslims]’.37 
Walī Allāh thus calls for an innovative approach to the normative order 
within the bounds of tradition. Yet his careful balancing of innovation and 
tradition has not been easy for many of his self-professed intellectual heirs. 
The Deobandīs honour his jurisprudential eclecticism but do not aban-
don the ‘obligation to conform to a single school’ (al-iltizām bi-madhhab 
muʿayyan).38 The Salafīs also hold him in high regard, but do not see much 
value in traditional reason-based jurisprudential methodologies. His South 
Asian ‘heirs’ have not explored his proposal to use Mālik’s Muwaṭṭaʾ to 
resolve intra-Muslim normative differences. Here, Kāndhalawī’s Awjaz is 
an exception, since the author explores contradictions and differences in 
the classical law schools at length. Yet, as I demonstrate in what follows, 
33 Al-Dihlawī, al-Musawwā, 1:29. 
34 Al-Dihlawī, al-Musawwā, 1:29.
35 Al-Dihlawī, al-Musawwā, 1:29.
36 See Daniel W. Brown, Rethinking Tradition, 112–116. 
37 Al-Dihlawī, al-Musawwā, 1:29.
38 On this, see al-Tahānawī, Iʿlāʾ al-sunan, 19:9373–9375. See also Thānawī, al-Iqtiṣād  
fī-l-taqlīd wa-l-ijtihād. 
214 
ALI ALTAF MIAN

  
DEBATING AUTHORITY AND AUTHENTICITY  
215
Kāndhalawī does not use the Muwaṭṭaʾ to flesh out Walī Allāh’s recon-
ciliatory programme. Rather, the Awjaz is largely an apologetic effort by 
a Ḥanafī traditionist to fortify the authority and authenticity of his legal 
school against Salafī detractors. My argument makes it clear that while Walī 
Allāh is interested in resolving contradictions between reports (a method 
called jamʿ or tawfīq), Kāndhalawī prefers one set of reports over another 
(a process called tarjīḥ, i.e. ‘juristic preference’).39 This is not to suggest 
that Walī Allāh does not occasionally engage in tarjīḥ or that Kāndhalawī 
does not engage in jurisprudential reconciliation. Rather, I note that recon-
ciliation is Walī Allāh’s hermeneutic modus operandi, since it assists in his 
elaboration of a unified, capacious normative order. Kāndhalawī, however, 
is primarily invested in a ‘juristic preference’ that enables him to defend  
the Ḥanafī school. In this way, the Awjaz amply documents the Deobandī 
resistance to Walī Allāh’s intra-Sunnī eclecticism. Before we examine 
examples of how this happens in the pages of the Awjaz, a more detailed 
portrait of Kāndhalawī and some further notes on this text are in order. 
The Commentator and the Commentary
Muḥammad Zakariyyā Kāndhalawī was born in the United Provinces  
of colonial India in a small town known as Kandhla on 3 February 1898 
(11 Ramadan 1315).40 His family was renowned for ‘knowledge, righteous-
ness, and piety’.41 His father and grandfather, Muḥammad Yaḥyā and 
Muḥammad Ismāʿīl respectively, preoccupied themselves in the teaching 
and preaching of the Qur’an, prophetic traditions and Ḥanafī jurispru-
dence. They were also practising Sufis and embodied strict personal dis-
cipline. Kāndhalawī’s father, Muḥammad Yaḥyā, was a disciple of the Sufi 
and jurist Rashīd Aḥmad Gangōhī (1826–1905), the first major Deobandī 
hadith commentator.42 Kāndhalawī later assisted his father in publishing 
Rashīd Aḥmad’s commentaries on the hadith collections of al-Bukhārī and 
al-Tirmidhī.43 Muḥammad Yaḥyā paid great attention to his son’s religious 
upbringing; he taught him Arabic and Persian primers as well as basic theo-
logical and jurisprudential texts at home. After memorising the Qur’an at a 
young age, Kāndhalawī became a full-time student at a traditional madrasa 
in Saharanpur, India.
39 See Turkmānī, Dirāsāt, 499–506. See also ʿAbd al-Ṣamad, Taʿāruḍ al-akhbār wa-l-tarjīḥ 
baynahā.
40 Nadwī, Sawāniḥ Ḥaz̤ rat Shaykh al-Ḥadīth, 49. 
41 Al-Banūrī, ‘Kalima ʿan al-muʾallif’, 1:7. 
42 For his biography, see Mīrathī, Tazkirat-ur-Rashīd; al-Ḥasanī, Nuzhat al-khawāṭir, 
8:163–167; al-Kumillāyī, al-Budūr al-maḍiyya, 7:283–287. 
43 Gangōhī and al-Kāndhalawī, Lāmiʿ al-darārī; Gangōhī and al-Kāndhalawī, al-Kawkab 
al-durrī. See Zaman, ‘Commentaries, Print and Patronage’, 69–71.

 The madrasa culture in which Kāndhalawī was trained as an adolescent 
was an amalgamation of a Qur’an memorisation school (maktab), a classical 
Muslim seminary, a colonial Indian British college, a hadith study circle and 
a Sufi lodge. He was intensely devoted to his studies; his biography states that 
sometimes six consecutive months would pass by without him stepping out-
side the walls of Maẓāhir al-ʿUlūm in Saharanpur, the madrasa from which 
he graduated in 1916.44 This madrasa and the Dār al-ʿUlūm in Deoband 
shared an almost identical approach to theology, jurisprudence and Sufism.45
Scholars at Deoband and Maẓāhir al-ʿUlūm used a modified version 
of the twelfth-/eighteenth-century Indo-Muslim curriculum known as the 
dars-i Niẓāmī whose core subjects included Persian and Arabic language 
and literature, law and legal theory, and the rationalist sciences (maʿqūlāt).46 
While these two madrasas valued these subjects, they also transmitted to 
their students a hadith-centred approach to theology and law.47 Thus, they 
modified the Niẓāmī curriculum by omitting some texts of philosophy 
and logic and adding a final year exclusively devoted to the ‘six authen-
tic books’ and other classical hadith collections by Mālik, Muḥammad  
b. al-Ḥasan al-Shaybānī (132–189/750–805), and Abū Jaʿfar al-Ṭaḥāwī  
(c. 230–321/845–933).48 Kāndhalawī excelled in his hadith studies to 
such an extent that his teacher, Khalīl Aḥmad Sahāranpūrī (1852–1927), 
sought his help to complete his research on hadith.49 Kāndhalawī’s rigor-
ous editorial efforts enabled Khalīl Aḥmad to publish his Badhl al-majhūd, 
a voluminous commentary on the Sunan of Abū Dāwūd.50 In the book’s 
initial manuscript, Khalīl Aḥmad wrote that Kāndhalawī ‘is worthy of hav-
ing this work attributed to him’, but Kāndhalawī ‘deleted this phrase out  
of respect and reverence [for his teacher]’.51 When Khalīl Aḥmad died in 
1927, Kāndhalawī succeeded him as ‘Shaykh al-Ḥadīth’. 
It is important to note that Khalīl Aḥmad was also Kāndhalawī’s Sufi 
master. Hadith and Sufism merged in Kāndhalawī’s life in a significant way. 
He likened his editorial work on Khalīl Aḥmad’s Badhl al-majhūd to the Sufi 
44 Nadwī, Sawāniḥ Ḥaz̤ rat Shaykh al-Ḥadīth, 59. 
45 For scholarship on Deobandī Islam, see Metcalf, Islamic Revival in British India;  
Metcalf, Islamic Contestations; Zaman, The Ulama in Contemporary Islam; Zaman, 
Modern Islamic Thought; Moosa, What is a Madrasa?; Ingram, Revival from Below. 
46 For a historical account of the Islamic sciences in precolonial India, see al-Ḥasanī, 
al-Thaqāfa al-islāmiyya.
47 For an overview of hadith in South Asia, see Isḥāq, India’s Contribution; Aḥmad, 
‘ʿUlūm-i Ḥadīth par Hindustān kī ʿArabī taʾlīfāt’; ʿUsmānī, ‘Silsila-yi Shāh Walīullāh kī 
khidmat-i Ḥadīth’. 
48 Mālik b. Anas, al-Muwaṭṭaʾ; al-Shaybānī, Muwaṭṭaʾ; al-Ṭaḥāwī, Sharḥ maʿānī al-āthār. 
49 For his biography, see Mīrathī, Tazkirat-ul-Khalīl; al-Ḥasanī, Nuzhat al-khawāṭir, 
8:145–148; al-Kumillāyī, al-Budūr al-maḍiyya, 7:158–162.
50 Al-Sahāranfūrī, Badhl al-majhūd. 
51 Taqī al-Dīn Nadwī, ‘Muqaddima’, 29. 
216 
ALI ALTAF MIAN

  
DEBATING AUTHORITY AND AUTHENTICITY  
217
ideal of annihilation. Note that in some strands of Sufi thought and prac-
tice, annihilation (fanāʾ) first begins with ‘annihilation in the Sufi master’, 
which is then transformed into ‘annihilation in the Prophet Muḥammad’.52 
The act of compiling footnotes on his Sufi master’s hadith commentary was 
at once a method for him to deepen his attachment to hadith and Sufism. 
By Kāndhalawī’s time, this practice of combining the study of hadith and 
Sufism was a well-trodden path for South Asian jurists and Sufis.53
To annihilate oneself in the Sufi master, then in the person of the 
Prophet Muhammad and finally in God involves developing a highly rever-
ential relationship with these objects of devotional love. In this regard, bio-
graphical sources draw attention to Kāndhalawī’s adoration for and awe 
of his ‘elders’, the Prophet and God. In some of these sources, his students 
characterise his lectures on al-Bukhārī’s Ṣaḥīḥ and Abū Dāwūd’s Sunan 
as full of ‘concentration, compassion, diligence, zeal, and cheerfulness’.54 
His student Taqī al-Dīn Nadwī writes, ‘He ornamented the lecture hall of 
Dār al-Ḥadīth with his sweet-scented presence. The reverence, honour, 
and peace of mind we experienced in his presence made us feel as if the 
Prophet Muḥammad himself was in our midst.’55 In some cases, commen-
tary lectures involved physical lessons. For example, a report in the ‘Book 
of Prayer’ in al-Bukhārī’s Ṣaḥīḥ is difficult to understand without a physical 
demonstration. According to this report, the Prophet 
stood up near a piece of wood in the mosque [after finishing the 
prayer], and leaned on it in such a manner [that it appeared that] he 
was quite upset. He then put his right hand over his left hand, and 
clasped his hands by interlacing his fingers, then he placed his right 
cheek in the palm of his left hand. 
In his lectures on al-Bukhārī, Kāndhalawī would stand up to demonstrate 
this prophetic posture, acting out the report’s content (matn), so to speak.56 
Kāndhalawī also commented on intra-Sunnī jurisprudential differences 
in his hadith lectures. Taqī al-Dīn Nadwī notes that while Kāndhalawī 
often defended Ḥanafī legal doctrines, he did so without deriding oppo-
nents such as Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī (773–852/1372–1449). In fact, he 
52 For a complication of this trajectory, see Ogunnaike, ‘Annihilation in the Messenger 
Revisited’.
53 Some of the major exemplars of this trend in South Asian Islam include ʿAlī al-Muttaqī 
(885–975/1480–1568), Muḥammad Ṭāhir al-Patanī of Gujarat (914–980/1508–1578), 
ʿAbd al-Ḥaqq al-Dihlawī (958–1052/1551–1642) and Shāh Walī Allāh of Delhi  
(1114–1176/1702–1763).
54 Taqī al-Dīn Nadwī, ‘Muqaddima’, 31. 
55 Taqī al-Dīn Nadwī, ‘Muqaddima’, 31. 
56 Taqī al-Dīn Nadwī, ‘Muqaddima’, 34.

 ‘acknowledged the indebtedness of all hadith students to Ibn Ḥajar’,57 but 
noted that the latter ‘pretended’ that Ḥanafī jurists lacked scriptural proofs 
for their legal doctrines. Kāndhalawī sought ways to translate reports into 
modern idioms and shared his stories about his teachers and other Indo-
Muslim religious luminaries with his students. Taqī al-Dīn states that his 
teacher paid special attention to reports that authenticate Ḥanafī legal 
doctrines, making the latter ‘appear as closely aligned with hadith’.58 
After teaching hadith in Saharanpur for over forty years, in 1973 
Kāndhalawī permanently settled in Medina, where he died in 1982. His 
influence among Deobandīs, and among many South Asian Muslims more 
broadly, is largely due to two factors: (1) his hadith books, which have 
been popularised by the Tablīghī Jamāʿat and (2) the noteworthy madrasa 
network of his student disciples in India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, southern 
Africa, the United Kingdom and North America. His Sufi order is a vibrant 
global network with disciples and successors in places as diverse as London, 
Lahore and Lusaka. In this regard, one student disciple, Muḥammad Yūsuf 
Motālā (1946–2019), deserves special mention as the founder (in 1973) of 
the first Deobandī madrasa in the Western hemisphere; it is in Holcombe 
(near Bury, England). Muḥammad Yūsuf’s students and disciples are active 
as imams, hadith teachers and spiritual guides, in mosques and madrasas, 
but also on social media.59 We can now briefly examine the text at hand, 
namely, the Awjaz al-masālik. 
In his 1972 preface to the Awjaz, Muḥammad Yūsuf al-Banūrī (1908–
1977), a leading student of the Deobandī traditionist and jurist Anwar Shāh 
Kashmīrī (1875–1933) and a distinguished hadith scholar in his own right, 
lists various ‘distinctions’ (khaṣāʾiṣ) of Kāndhalawī’s commentary.60 To sum-
marise his main points, the Awjaz comments on both the report itself (matn) 
and its chain of narration (isnād). It deals with isnāds in a concise manner and 
concentrates in greater depth on a tradition’s meaning. Kāndhalawī identi-
fies a report’s phraseological variations and contextualises the report in the 
jurisprudential framework of the canonical Sunnī law schools. The Awjaz also 
includes abundant citations from earlier commentaries of the Muwaṭṭaʾ.61 
57 Taqī al-Dīn Nadwī, ‘Muqaddima’, 32. 
58 Taqī al-Dīn Nadwī, ‘Muqaddima’, 32–33.
59 Birt and Lewis, ‘The Pattern of Islamic Reform in Britain’.
60 Al-Banūrī, ‘Kalima ʿan al-muʾallif’.
61 According to Raḥmat Allāh al-Nadawī, Kāndhalawī’s most trusted authorities include 
Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr’s al-Tamhīd (on which he relies for debates concerning chains of nar-
ration, or asānīd), al-Bājī’s al-Muntaqā (for jurisprudential interpretation and for the 
general sense of a report), al-Zarqānī’s Sharḥ (for philology and for the biographies 
of narrators), and Khalīl Aḥmad’s Badhl al-majhūd, which is especially instructive for 
insights into composition, argumentation and the biographies of narrators (al-Nadawī, 
al-Muḥaddith al-kabīr, 278). 
218 
ALI ALTAF MIAN

  
DEBATING AUTHORITY AND AUTHENTICITY  
219
For al-Banūrī, the Awjaz ‘is the most comprehensive commentary on the 
Muwaṭṭaʾ in terms of hadith studies, jurisprudence, and philology’.62 The 
Awjaz is also like ‘a connective tissue between the luminaries of India and  
the notables of the Arab world’63 since it draws on Indo-Muslim sources rarely 
consulted in the Arabic-speaking world. Moreover, the Awjaz adopts a clear 
and balanced method of exposition; it strikes a balance between verbosity  
and brevity. In this way, al-Banūrī highlights Kāndhalawī’s ‘interpretive  
excellences’. Yet the latter’s commentary also addresses a broader social arena. 
According to the broader logic that governs the Awjaz, the most effec-
tive defence of the Ḥanafī tradition involves demonstrating the author-
ity and authenticity of the textual and non-textual types of the Prophet’s 
practice (Sunna). Mālik’s Muwaṭṭaʾ is especially useful for this objective, 
since it honours both types of Sunna. Kāndhalawī seeks to demonstrate 
the authority of ‘the inherited tradition’ (al-sunnat al-mutawāratha), 
especially in its non-textual forms (such as social institutions and embod-
ied practices). This demonstration in turn bolsters the authority and 
authenticity of the Ḥanafī tradition, since many of its legal doctrines rely 
on an inherited tradition that was not always verified by the Sunnī had-
ith canon. Yet we should note that what Kāndhalawī offers in the Awjaz 
is not only an apologetic polemic directed at Ahl-i Ḥadīth scholars but 
also a subtle response to Shāh Walī Allāh’s eclectic, capacious approach  
to the normative order. The following two illustrations from the Awjaz 
demonstrate this point. 
Touching the Penis
At the beginning of the Muwaṭṭaʾ a cluster of six reports suggests that it 
is necessary to make ablution (wuḍūʾ) after touching the genitalia. These 
reports reflect the position of the Mālikīs, Shāfiʿīs, and Ḥanbalīs.64 The 
Ḥanafīs, however, unambiguously state that touching the penis does not 
invalidate purity. Before exploring this matter further, let us first consider 
the report that Kāndhalawī focuses on in his commentary: 
According to Mālik, ʿAbdallāh b. Abī Bakr reported from Ibn 
Muḥammad b. ʿAmr b. Ḥazm that he heard ʿUrwa b. al-Zubayr say, ‘I 
met with Marwān b. al-Ḥakam, and we discussed what necessitates 
the performance of ablution. Marwān said, “Touching one’s penis 
necessitates ablution.” ʿUrwa said, “I did not know that.” Marwān b. 
al-Ḥakam then said, “Busra bt. Ṣafwān informed me that she heard 
62 Al-Banūrī, ‘Kalima ʿan al-muʾallif’, 9.
63 Al-Banūrī, ‘Kalima ʿan al-muʾallif’, 10.
64 On this issue, see Wheeler, ‘Touching the Penis in Islamic Law’.

 the Messenger of God say, ‘If someone touches his penis, he should 
perform ablution.’”’65
We can refer to this as ‘the report of Busra.’ Shāh Walī Allāh’s commentary 
on this matter is quite brief: 
According to al-Shāfiʿī, it is obligatory to perform ablution after 
touching the genitalia if this touching involves the palm of the hand 
or rubbing between fingers. For Abū Ḥanīfa, however, touching the 
genitalia does not invalidate wuḍūʾ, and his evidence for this posi-
tion is the saying of the Prophet, ‘Is it not only a part of your body?’66 
Kāndhalawī’s commentary starts by citing Ibn Qudāma’s definition of 
‘genitalia’: it is ‘another name for those body parts that discharge impuri-
ties and can refer to the penis, vagina, and anus’.67 Kāndhalawī problema-
tises this definition: 
It is clear that the author [Mālik] is only referring to the penis. As for 
touching the vagina and anus, none of the following reports address 
this, as is clear from these texts. According to the Mālikīs, touching 
the anus does not invalidate wuḍūʾ, even though there is much dis-
agreement among jurists on this issue.68 
Kāndhalawī then summarises numerous reports on this issue, allowing 
readers to see that there is significant disagreement among the Compan-
ions, the Successors and the master jurists of the four law schools. He pres-
ents the Ḥanafī position as remarkably consistent on the matter: ‘touching 
the penis does not invalidate wuḍūʾ’.69 However, the views of non-Ḥanafī 
jurists are not as clear. For example, some think that touching the genitalia 
invalidates one’s ablution only when done intentionally. Others stipulate 
that it is only touching with the palm of one’s hand that invalidates wuḍūʾ. 
Some say that purity is lost only if lust is involved. Kāndhalawī directs 
the reader to the Mālikī scholar Abū Bakr b. al-ʿArabī’s commentary on 
al-Tirmidhī’s Jāmiʿ for a fuller account of these differences.70 
Kāndhalawī next turns his attention to the six reports on this matter in 
Mālik’s Muwaṭṭaʾ. He starts with the observation that only the first of the 
65 Mālik b. Anas, al-Muwaṭṭaʾ, 95. 
66 Al-Dihlawī, al-Musawwā, 1:73.
67 Ibn Qudāma, al-Mughnī, 1:240. 
68 Al-Kāndhalawī, Awjaz al-masālik, 1:268. For other Deobandī treatments of this issue in 
the context of the hadith commentary genre, see al-Banūrī, Maʿārif al-sunan, 1:356–361.
69 Al-Kāndhalawī, Awjaz al-masālik, 1:269.
70 Ibn al-ʿArabī, ʿĀriḍat al-aḥwadhī, 1:113–123. 
220 
ALI ALTAF MIAN

  
DEBATING AUTHORITY AND AUTHENTICITY  
221
six reports can be attributed to the Prophet (that is, only the first report is a 
ḥadīth marfūʿ). The other five reports are sayings of the Companions (āthār 
al-Ṣaḥāba). He then engages in an ingenious interpretive exercise called ‘oppo-
sition of attributed reports’ (muʿāraḍa al-marfūʿ bi-l-marfūʿ).71 He informs us 
that the Ḥanafīs cite and support their position by means of another ḥadīth 
marfūʿ on this matter, namely: ‘Ṭalq b. ʿAlī said, ‘A person asked the Prophet 
about a man who touches his penis: should he perform ablution?’ The Prophet 
replied, “Is it not only a part of your body?”’72 (Note that Shāh Walī Allāh, as 
mentioned above, alludes to the same report.) Clearly, this report contradicts 
‘the report of Busra’ (see above). Instead of letting the contradiction stand, as 
Walī Allāh did, Kāndhalawī demonstrates his mastery of ‘narration- or trans-
mission-based criticism’ (ʿilm al-riwāya) to expose the weakness of the report 
of Busra and to establish the soundness of the ḥadīth marfūʿ, which supports 
the Ḥanafī position (the report of Ṭalq b. ʿAlī). 
Kāndhalawī also cites earlier Ḥanafī authorities who dismissed the report 
of Busra on the grounds that she was not qualified to know this, since ‘the 
issue pertains to the matters of men’.73 Moreover, Kāndhalawī appeals to 
the Ḥanafī legal principle according to which a solitary report is insufficient 
to determine norms in matters of common hardship (ʿumūm al-balwā, i.e., 
requiring Muslim men to wash their bodies each time they touched their penis 
would amount to practical hardship). In short, the hermeneutical strategy of 
‘opposition of attributed reports’ allows Kāndhalawī to use contradictions to 
defend the Ḥanafī position. As for the possibility that the report used by the  
Ḥanafīs is unreliable, Kāndhalawī refers his readers to the Badhl al-majhūd 
of his teacher Khalīl Aḥmad, which comments on the authenticity of this 
report.74 Here we see how, without saying so, Kāndhalawī positions himself  
as a judge between the proof texts of the Ḥanafī school and those of the other 
law schools on this issue. And in his judgement, the Ḥanafīs are winners. We 
can also see, quite clearly, that he is not invested in eclecticism or reconcilia-
tion, but uses both matn and isnād tools to pursue his apologetic agenda. 
Raising the Hands in Prayer
The Muwaṭṭaʾ contains a chapter titled ‘Commencement of the Prayer 
(Ṣalāt)’, which includes the following report:
According to Mālik, Ibn Shihāb reported from Sālim b. ʿAbdallāh, 
from ʿAbdallāh b. ʿUmar, that when the Messenger of God com-
menced the prayer, he would raise both of his hands to the level of his 
71 Al-Kāndhalawī, Awjaz al-masālik, 1:273. 
72 Al-Kāndhalawī, Awjaz al-masālik, 1:271.
73 Al-Kāndhalawī, Awjaz al-masālik, 1:272. 
74 Al-Sahāranfūrī, Badhl al-majhūd, 2:53–63. 

 shoulders, and when he stood up after bowing, he raised them again 
in a similar manner and said, ‘God hears those who praise Him. All 
praise belongs to You, our Lord!’ He did not do that, however, when 
he stood up following prostration.75
This report contradicts the Ḥanafī position, which stipulates that the 
only time one raises the hands to the shoulders is at the beginning of the 
prayer. However, both Shāfiʿīs and Ḥanbalīs believe it is necessary to raise 
one’s hands to the shoulders before and after bowing, as a recurring act 
inside the prayer. There are two Mālikī positions on the matter. The first 
is in accordance with the above report (and thus in accordance with the 
Shāfiʿīs and Ḥanbalīs), and the second, which is mentioned in the Mudawa-
nna (another major Mālikī legal compendium), is in accordance with the 
Ḥanafīs. Note that in addition to the above report there are many others in 
the Sunnī hadith canon that support the non-Ḥanafī position.
With the weight of transmission-based proofs against his law school, 
Kāndhalawī deploys a clever interpretive strategy. He first lists all the 
reports that pertain to various types of ‘raising of hands’ (rafʿ al-yadayn). 
These reports mention raising the hands when one begins the prayer, rais-
ing the hands before and after bowing, raising the hands before and after 
prostration and raising the hands after completing two prayer cycles. After 
a lengthy discussion, Kāndhalawī addresses the reader: ‘Perhaps you have 
understood from the aforementioned reports and sayings of scholars that 
various forms of raising the hands in prayer are proven from authentic tra-
ditions?’76 Kāndhalawī thus assembles the contradictory reports about man-
ual movements to argue for the necessity of legal reasoning, since following 
all the authentic reports on this issue means that one would perform the 
prayer without any formal consistency. In the presence of such contradic-
tions, Ḥanafī jurists rely on ‘juristic preference’ (tarjīḥ) out of necessity. 
Here we see how, for Kāndhalawī, the ‘contradiction of reports’ (taʿāruḍ 
al-riwāyāt) serves to invalidate the sola scriptura method advocated by  
the Salafīs. When one takes seriously the transmission-based archive of 
hadith, the logical conclusion is to use reason-based jurisprudence.77 To 
make his case for ‘juristic preference’, Kāndhalawī argues that the Ḥanafīs 
and Mālikīs alone cannot be blamed for preferring one set of reports when 
the Shāfiʿīs and Mālikīs also engage in ‘juristic preference’ by abandoning 
reports about raising the hands before and after prostration.78 Thus, with 
75 Mālik b. Anas, al-Muwaṭṭaʾ, 113. 
76 Al-Kāndhalawī, Awjaz al-masālik, 2:47. For other Deobandī treatments of this issue in 
the context of the hadith commentary genre, see al-Kashmīrī, Fayḍ al-Bārī, 2:321–331; 
al-ʿUthmānī, Fatḥ al-mulhim, 3:306–329; al-Banūrī, Maʿārif al-sunan, 2:453–506. 
77 Al-Kāndhalawī, Awjaz al-masālik, 2:48. 
78 Al-ʿUthmānī also makes this point; see Fatḥ al-mulhim, 3:327. 
222 
ALI ALTAF MIAN

  
DEBATING AUTHORITY AND AUTHENTICITY  
223
reference to this issue all law schools engage in some form of juristic pref-
erence.79 Yet for Kāndhalawī it is important not to give readers the impres-
sion that in this matter the Ḥanafī position depends solely on ‘forms of 
juristic preference’ (wujūh at-tarjīḥ).80
Kāndhalawī offers ten prophetic reports to defend the Ḥanafī position, 
and in so doing displays his mastery of isnād criticism. He then presents 
several sayings of Companions, underscoring the idea that on the matter of 
raising one’s hands during the prayer, we must clearly distinguish between 
‘textual reports’ and ‘communal practice’. It is in this context that he answers 
Salafīs: ‘It cannot be said that the reports I have mentioned are weak or that 
their narrators are compromised just because al-Bukhārī and Muslim do 
not include them in their books. Nor can someone who has insight into 
the science of hadith raise such objections.’81 Kāndhalawī cites both Aḥmad 
b. Ḥanbal (164–241/780–855) and Jalāl al-Dīn al-Suyūṭī (849–911/1445–
1505) to argue that the actual number of ‘authentic’ reports far exceeds the 
contents of the collections of al-Bukhārī and Muslim, saying: ‘It is clear that 
authentic reports are not restricted to what is present in the extant circulat-
ing books.’82 Kāndhalawī further suggests that al-Bukhārī and Muslim only 
recorded those reports that agreed with their personal jurisprudential posi-
tions. He also points out that while from the vantage of isnād criticism the 
collections of al-Bukhārī and Muslim are the most authentic books after 
the Qur’an, those familiar with hadith studies know that these two compil-
ers and their narrators are not immune from scrutiny. Yet he does not say 
this to encourage hypervigilance in isnād criticism. Rather, his point is to 
restrict this form of criticism. Thus, he emphasises holistic interpretations 
and focuses on solving the practical issues faced by ordinary Muslims: 
There are entire archives (dafātīr) that can be constructed to sup-
port both sides of this debate, and this is the secret behind why  
the Ḥanafīs, may God reward them for their efforts, do not pursue 
the extensive listing of reports . . . and instead focus their efforts  
on the extraction of legal details, since that is what the blessed  
Muslim community requires for practical purposes.83
Kāndhalawī thus defends the Ḥanafī tradition by appealing to both  
reason-based and transmission-based forms of argumentation. He cites 
79 Al-Kāndhalawī, Awjaz al-masālik, 2:48.
80 On the debates involved in tarjīḥ internal to Muslim legal traditions, see ʿAwwāma, 
Athar al-ḥadīth al-sharīf, 145–165; for a more precise account of these debates in the 
Ḥanafī tradition, see Turkmānī, Dirāsāt, 510–531. 
81 Al-Kāndhalawī, Awjaz al-masālik, 2:52.
82 Al-Kāndhalawī, Awjaz al-masālik, 2:52. 
83 Al-Kāndhalawī, Awjaz al-masālik, 2:52. 

 ʿAbd al-Wahhāb al-Shaʿrānī (897–973/1492–1565) to claim that ‘it suffices 
for the authenticity of a report that it has formed the basis for the action of 
the major jurists’.84 This point echoes the traditional Ḥanafī legal principle, 
according to which preference should be given to jurists’ reports over non-
jurists’ reports.85
What reason-based interpretive strategies served Kāndhalawī’s polemi-
cal purposes? First and foremost, he claims, Ḥanafī jurists prefer to read 
the normative order in light of the Qur’an.86 Their position on not raising 
hands before and after bowing in prayer is extrapolated from the Qur’anic 
verse, ‘and stand before God in sincere devotion’ (2:38).87 Ḥanafī jurists 
also entertain the likely possibility that the practice of raising one’s hands 
in prayer was abrogated in the final years of the Prophet’s mission, because 
many Companions, especially those based in Medina and Kufa, did not raise 
their hands. This position can be traced back to the fourth-/tenth-century 
jurist Abū Jaʿfar al-Ṭaḥāwī (d. 321/933). However, here Kāndhalawī differs 
from other Deobandī scholars, such as Anwar Shāh Kashmīrī, who defend 
the Ḥanafī position without endorsing al-Ṭaḥāwī’s judgement about abro-
gation.88 Kāndhalawī then discusses the rational proof, according to which 
‘[the evolving form of] prayer transitioned [in the Prophet’s lifetime] from 
movements to calmness, and so from among the contradictory reports on 
this issue, the Ḥanafīs choose what is closest to [achieving] calmness’.89 
Kāndhalawī also cites the argument from al-Ṭaḥāwī that raising the hands 
and turning one’s face right and left are opening and closing gestures of 
the prayer. According to this line of reasoning, these two gestures are used 
exclusively in the prayer and differentiate it from other human actions.90 
In what follows, we see that Shāh Walī Allāh offers a different perspective  
on such ‘forms of juristic preference’. 
In the final analysis, Kāndhalawī seeks to demonstrate that one cannot 
read reports alone to determine the norm, even in something as minor 
as raising the hands (though this is not a trivial matter for him). The 
diversity of, and contradictions in, reports necessitates legal reasoning. 
The language he uses to make his case is at times quite apologetic and he  
84 Al-Kāndhalawī, Awjaz al-masālik, 2:52–53. 
85 On this, see al-Tahānawī, Iʿlāʾ al-sunan, 19:9398–9400. See also al-Kāndhalawī, Awjaz 
al-masālik, 1:9.
86 For an exposition of this Ḥanafī jurisprudential principle, see Nāṣir, ‘Fiqh al-ḥadīth’, 
314–315. 
87 Al-Kāndhalawī, Awjaz al-masālik, 2:53.
88 See al-Kashmīrī, Nayl al-farqadayn; ʿUsmānī, Dars-i Tirmidhī. For al-Kashmīrī’s 
biography, see al-Banūrī, Nafḥat al-ʿanbar; al-Ḥasanī, Nuzhat al-khawāṭir, 8:90–94; 
al-Kumillāyī, al-Budūr al-maḍiyya, 5:87–127; Abū Ghudda, Tarājim sitta, 13–81. 
89 Al-Kāndhalawī, Awjaz al-masālik, 2:53. 
90 Al-Kāndhalawī, Awjaz al-masālik, 2:53.
224 
ALI ALTAF MIAN

  
DEBATING AUTHORITY AND AUTHENTICITY  
225
sometimes lumps together the Ḥanafīs and Mālikīs without acknowledg-
ing the difference of opinion on this issue that had characterised the Mālikī 
tradition.91 Kāndhalawī thus offers quite a different approach than what 
we find in Shāh Walī Allāh’s extremely brief note on the same report, in 
which he says, ‘this report serves to establish for most learned authorities 
the [legitimacy of] raising the hands at the beginning of the prayer as well 
as before and after bowing. However, for Abū Ḥanīfa, the hands are not 
raised except [i.e. raised only] at the beginning of the prayer.’92 It is useful 
to dwell on this comparison to see how Kāndhalawī’s exegetical aims differ 
from that of his twelfth-/eighteenth-century predecessor. 
Walī Allāh addresses the question of raising the hands lucidly in his 
masterpiece, Ḥujjat Allāh al-bāligha. I cite his words at some length since 
they flesh out how he differs from Kāndhalawī’s mode of reasoning: 
Raising the hands is a reverential act that alerts the self to abandon 
preoccupation with all that might distract from the prayer. This act 
also prepares the self to enter the field of supplication. The Prophet 
raised his hands at the beginning of each of the three major rev-
erential parts of the prayer [standing, bowing, and prostration], so 
that the self might be reminded to be aware of the benefit [of these 
acts of reverence]. This act is one of those forms that the Prophet 
performed and abandoned, and both practices are validated by his 
sunna. This is why each position has its followers from among the 
Companions, the Successors, and those who came after them. This 
is in fact one of those matters on which the following two groups 
differed: the people of Medina and the people of Kufa. Each group 
has solid proof on its side. The truth of the matter, in my view, is that 
both practices are normative . . . but I prefer those who raise their 
hands [before and after bowing] over those who do not, since their 
position is supported by more and sounder prophetic reports. How-
ever, it is not suitable for anyone to invite upon himself the wrath of 
his compatriots in such matters [by following the legal position that 
is not customary in one’s locality].93
Note that Walī Allāh reconciles this jurisprudential difference to secure 
an eclectic approach to the normative order. He relies on content-based 
analysis to vindicate the non-Ḥanafī position (‘reverential act that alerts  
the self’), but also mentions a transmission-based reason (‘more and 
sounder reports’). In his view, the two vying groups are not Ḥanafīs and 
91 For debates among Mālikī jurists on this question, see Fierro, ‘La polemique’. 
92 Al-Dihlawī, al-Musawwā, 1:142. 
93 Al-Dihawī, Ḥujjat Allāh al-Bāligha, 1:16. 

 Mālikīs on one side, and Shāfiʿīs and Ḥanbalīs on the other side. Rather, 
the disagreement, as he sees it, is between the people of Medina and those 
of Kufa. Mālik’s Muwaṭṭaʾ essentially upholds the position that was later 
taken to be normative by the Shāfiʿīs and Ḥanbalīs. Also note that Walī 
Allāh reveals his preference but creates room in the normative order for 
both interpretations, and so advises against the disruption of a local norm 
as long as it is based in the sunna. 
A Salafī Commentary
How did Ahl-i Ḥadīth scholars comment on this issue? To answer this ques-
tion, I briefly examine a commentary on al-Tirmidhī’s al-Jāmiʿ al-Ṣaḥīḥ by 
the Ahl-i Ḥadīth scholar ʿAbd al-Raḥmān Mubārakpūrī (al-Mubārakfūrī). 
Al-Tirmidhī mentions reports about raising the hands before and after 
bowing in two chapters (abwāb). The main report is in the chapter titled 
‘Raising the hands while bowing’, and has the following chain:
Tirmidhī – Qutayba – Ibn Abī ʿUmar [Muḥammad b. Yaḥyā] – 
Sufyān b. ʿUyayna – al-Zuhrī – Sālim – the latter’s faith [the Com-
panion ʿAbdallāh b. ʿUmar].94
In this report ʿAbdallāh b. ʿUmar describes the Prophet Muhammad as 
raising his hands to his shoulders when he began the prayer and doing the 
same before and after bowing. However, he did not raise his hands to his 
shoulders before and after the prostration. This first report does not sup-
port the Ḥanafī position. The second chapter, ‘What has been transmitted 
from the Prophet as he only raised his hands the first time [while initiating 
the prayer]’, mentions a report that supports the Ḥanafī position and has 
the following chain:
Hannād – Wakīʿ – Sufyān [al-Thawrī] – ʿĀsim b. Kulayb – ʿAbd 
al-Raḥmān b. al-Aswad – ʿAlqama – ʿAbdallāh b. Masʿūd.95
In his commentary al-Mubārakfūrī presents a detailed refutation of the 
second report attributed to the Companion ʿAbdallāh b. Masʿūd (hereafter  
Ibn Masʿūd). Al-Mubārakfūrī writes, ‘This report is weak, as you will 
soon learn, and is not a trusted report with reference to raising the hands 
while bowing.’96 He thus contradicts al-Tirmidhī, who said: ‘This report 
94 Al-Mubārakfūrī, Tuḥfat al-aḥwadhī, 2:118. In what follows, I use the Arabicised 
al-Mubārakfūrī instead of the Urdu Mubārakpūrī since the text is in Arabic. 
95 Al-Mubārakfūrī, Tuḥfat al-aḥwadhī, 2:122–123. 
96 Al-Mubārakfūrī, Tuḥfat al-aḥwadhī, 2:123.
226 
ALI ALTAF MIAN

  
DEBATING AUTHORITY AND AUTHENTICITY  
227
is of good standing and forms the basis of [the position of] many learned 
authorities from the Prophet’s Companions and the Successors. It is also 
the saying of Sufyān al-Thawrī and the people of Kufa.’97 Al-Mubārakfūrī, 
however, argues to the contrary: 
While al-Tirmidhī deems this report ‘good’ and Ibn Ḥazm has 
authenticated it, indeed ʿAbdallāh b. Mubārak considers it ‘weak’ and 
does not confirm the report of Ibn Masʿūd. Moreover, after narrat-
ing this report, Abū Dāwūd says in his Sunan: ‘This report abridges 
a longer report, and its wording here is not reliable.’98 
Al-Mubārakfūrī accuses al-Tirmidhī of laxity (tasāhul) in isnād criticism, 
and with reference to Ibn Ḥazm, he writes, ‘Here, Ibn Ḥazm cannot be 
taken seriously since numerous other hadith authorities have determined 
the report in question to be “weak”’.99 Al-Mubārakfūrī also cites from 
al-Bukhārī’s chapter on ‘raising the hands’ to refute the authenticity of the 
report attributed to Ibn Masʿūd.100 
To further make his case, al-Mubārakfūrī cites at length from Ibn ʿAbd 
al-Barr’s al-Tamhīd, underscoring that the most reliable report on raising 
the hands before and after bowing is the one attributed to ʿAbdallāh b. ʿUmar 
(see above), and its content is corroborated by reports of at least twelve 
additional Companions. On the report that supports the Ḥanafī position, 
al-Mubārakfūrī cites Ibn Ḥibbān’s saying from Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalani’s 
al-Talkhīṣ:
This is the best report that has been narrated in favour of the posi-
tion of the people of Kufa on the absence of raising of hands before 
and after bowing in prayer. Yet in reality it is the weakest [element] 
to depend on, since its various weaknesses [of the isnād] obliterate 
its authenticity.101 
Al-Mubārakfūrī also considers sayings of the Companions (āthār). The 
first two āthār he presents, namely the sayings of ʿUmar and ʿAlī b. Abī 
Ṭālib, are used by al-Ṭaḥāwī to defend the Ḥanafī position. Al-Mubārakfūrī 
refutes the authenticity of the āthār that support the Ḥanafī position and 
in doing so censures modern Indian Ḥanafī scholars, such as ʿAbd al-Ḥayy 
al-Laknawī (1848–1886).102 While al-Mubārakfūrī has a good grasp of 
 97 Al-Mubārakfūrī, Tuḥfat al-aḥwadhī, 2:124. 
 98 Al-Mubārakfūrī, Tuḥfat al-aḥwadhī, 2:124. 
 99 Al-Mubārakfūrī, Tuḥfat al-aḥwadhī, 2:125.
100 See al-Bukhārī, Kitāb rafʿ al-yadayn. 
101 Al-Mubārakfūrī, Tuḥfat al-aḥwadhī, 2:125. 
102 On him, see Abū al-Ḥājj, al-Manhaj al-fiqhhī; al-Ḥasanī, Nuzhat al-khawāṭir, 8:250–256.

 Ḥanafī scholars’ writings, he does not engage with those dimensions of 
their arguments that rely on extra-hadith jurisprudential methodology. 
For example, there is no mention of ‘forms of juristic preference’ (wujūh 
al-tarjīḥ) in his Salafī polemic.103
Al-Mubārakfūrī finally asks: What if we accept the authenticity of Ibn 
Masʿūd’s report? Al-Mubārakfūrī does not raise this possibility to affirm 
legal pluralism but to further weaken his opponent’s position. In doing so 
he attacks Ibn Masʿūd himself, claiming that his reports are tainted by his 
(Ibn Masʿūd’s) forgetfulness. He also cites the Ḥanafī authority Badr al-Dīn 
al-ʿAynī (d. 855/1451) to make the point that in the case of contradictory 
reports, one must prefer the most authentic report. Finally, he relies on Ibn 
Ḥazm to argue that Ibn Masʿūd’s report establishes the ‘non-existence of 
obligation’ (ʿadam al-wujūb) and not the abrogation (naskh) of the practice 
of raising one’s hands before and after bowing.104
Al-Mubārakfūrī’s criticism of the Companion Ibn Masʿūd tangentially 
echoes the views of Shāh Walī Allāh. Yet there is a substantial difference 
between the two commentators. Walī Allāh balances criticism and reverential 
comportment (adab). He explains that Ibn Masʿūd’s views are based on his 
‘understanding that the purpose of the prayer is to calm the body parts, and 
he did not think that raising the hands is a reverential act’.105 Note Walī Allāh’s 
use of empathy: ‘One must also consider that he might have thought that 
raising the hands signifies abandoning something [throwing it behind one’s 
back] and that is why he saw it as inappropriate for this act to occur inside 
the prayer.’106 This does not mean that Walī Allāh agrees with Ibn Masʿūd. 
Rather, he offers his own independent interpretation: ‘It did not appear to 
Ibn Masʿūd that this act is [done] to alert the self to abandon everything 
besides God, and this [awareness] is desirable in every part of the prayer. 
And God knows best.’107 In Walī Allāh’s hands, transmission-based concerns 
about authenticity do not weaken the authority of Ibn Masʿūd’s position. At 
the same time, he re-centres the spiritual objectives of the prayer in order  
to justify his own position. Thus, he models ecumenical cosmopolitanism 
and uses a method that balances the matn and isnād. Yet his vision for unity 
and difference does not sustain Deobandī Ḥanafīs or Ahl-i Ḥadīth Salafīs. 
Conclusion
In this chapter I have explored the limitations of intra-Muslim eclecticism 
and the enduring anxieties of authority and authenticity among Salafīs  
103 Al-Mubārakfūrī, Tuḥfat al-aḥwadhī, 2:129–133. 
104 Al-Mubārakfūrī, Tuḥfat al-aḥwadhī, 2:125–126. 
105 Al-Dihlawī, Ḥujjat Allāh al-bāligha, 1:16.
106 Al-Dihlawī, Ḥujjat Allāh al-bāligha, 1:16. 
107 Al-Dihlawī, Ḥujjat Allāh al-bāligha, 1:16–17. 
228 
ALI ALTAF MIAN

  
DEBATING AUTHORITY AND AUTHENTICITY  
229
and Ḥanafīs in modern South Asia. My aim, in part, has been to illuminate 
the particular ‘interpretive excellences’ modelled by Indo-Muslim hadith 
commentators. I have also sought to show that their hermeneutic efforts 
take place in broader social frameworks, such as the contestations between 
the Salafī/Ahl-i Ḥadīth movement and Deobandī Ḥanafīs. Finally, I have 
attempted to highlight the salience of the hadith commentary genre for 
understanding how ‘minor differences’ of perspective and practice con-
stitute major social fault lines. For both Ḥanafīs and Salafīs, hadiths are 
the surest link to the prophetic past, and are the source of authority and 
authenticity. Yet an analytical focus on hadith itself seldom reveals the pre-
cise contours of their sectarian fault lines. The latter can only be critically 
observed when we note divergent interpretive methodologies and conflict-
ing uses of content-based (matn) and transmission-based (isnād) forms 
of investigation. It is here that the hadith commentary genre illuminates 
subtle intra-Muslim discursive differences quite effectively. 
We saw above the significant extent to which al-Mubārakfūrī largely 
relies on isnād criticism without addressing his detractors’ reason-based 
methodologies and arguments. Isnād criticism offers him ample ammuni-
tion to attack the Ḥanafī tradition. The Salafī valorisation of the isnāds, 
however, was challenged in colonial India. In addition to the Deobandīs, 
Muslim thinkers of other ideological persuasions also supported the 
Ḥanafī tradition. For example, Shiblī Nuʿmānī wrote a long treatise on the 
distinguishing features of Abū Ḥanīfa’s jurisprudential legacy and argued 
‘that the study of ḥadīth requires the participation of legal scholars, the 
fuqahāʾ’.108 Likewise, the Islamist ideologue Abū’l A‘la Mawdūdī (1903–
1979) called for renewed attention to matn criticism.109 Yet Kāndhalawī’s 
approach does not align with Nuʿmānī and Mawdūdī, since for him the 
jurisprudential tradition provides knowledge of the ‘forms of juristic pref-
erence’ that require expertise in both isnād and matn.110 In the hands of 
Kāndhalawī, the commentary genre becomes the best textual space in 
which to elaborate and authenticate the minor details that have already 
been stipulated by earlier Ḥanafī jurists. His conservative balance of matn 
and isnād continues to characterise more recent Deobandī hadith com-
mentaries whose authors cite copiously from the Awjaz.111
Kāndhalawī’s approach substantially differs from that of both his cos-
mopolitan predecessor, Shāh Walī Allāh, and his contemporary sectarian 
opponents, such as al-Mubārakfūrī. Shāh Walī Allāh reconciles intra-Sunnī 
108 Daniel W. Brown, Rethinking Tradition, 114. See Nuʿmānī, Sīrat-un-Nuʿmān, esp. 
233–280, where he elaborates on the five unique features of the Ḥanafī tradition.
109 Daniel W. Brown, Rethinking Tradition, 115. 
110 ʿAwwāma, Athar al-ḥadīth al-sharīf, 147. 
111 See Bijnawrī, Anwār al-bārī; Khān, Kashf al-bārī. 

 differences in order to align the material and metaphysical dimensions 
of the normative order. Kāndhalawī concentrates on isnād criticism and 
imagines a normative order that reproduces – in embodied and sociologi-
cal forms – the contents of the Sunnī hadith canon. Studying these con-
trasting approaches allows us to observe how the hadith commentary genre 
becomes a site of imagining and contesting competing normative orders, 
and therefore a site of vying Muslim selves and societies. 
In conclusion, I would like to reflect, in an open-ended manner, on 
some lingering thoughts and questions about the themes of authority and 
authenticity, especially, the analytical purchase of the hadith commentary 
genre and the promise and politics of intra-Muslim reconciliation (taṭbīq). 
It seems that as early as the twelfth/eighteenth century, Shāh Walī Allāh 
could vaguely sense the gathering storm of intra-Muslim conflict, the 
incoming flood of perspectival and practical differences that would coincide 
with the collapse of Muslim sovereignty in South Asia. His proposed solu-
tion to contemporary and future discord was the embrace of intra-Sunnī 
ecumenism vis-à-vis the hadith canon, along with a renewed commitment 
to critical-constructive reasoning and reconciliatory hermeneutics. His 
textual support for this ambitious, and perhaps idealistic, reform project 
was Mālik’s Muwaṭṭaʾ, a collection of reports that balances communal cus-
toms, social welfare and transmission-based norms. Following Walī Allāh, 
the most extensive commentary on the Muwaṭṭaʾ is Kāndhalawī’s Awjaz 
al-masālik, whose title (‘the most abridged path’) evokes Walī Allāh’s hope 
for intra-Sunnī unity. To some extent the Awjaz honours this hope. Yet 
the polemical agenda of the Awjaz resists Walī Allāh’s ecumenical vision. 
Kāndhalawī pursues the realisation of an alternative hope. 
Perhaps we should view Shāh Walī Allāh’s hope for intra-Sunnī unity 
as a reflection of a normative order that overlapped with Muslim sover-
eignty and lacked, for the most part, the kind of colonial-era social division 
between the religious private and the secular public. For Walī Allāh, the 
everyday norms of the sharīʿa were not only manifest in the public, politi-
cal realm, but were also a link to the classical imaginary world of forms. 
Kāndhalawī retained some elements of this aspirational moral theology-
cum-cosmology in his private style of piety and highly technical commen-
taries. Yet Walī Allāh’s political world and imaginal cosmos did not exist 
as stages of self-fashioning and world-making for Kāndhalawī. What was 
Kāndhalawī’s alternative hope? 
In Kāndhalawī’s biography we read that during his days as a student 
in the madrasa, his father, Muḥammad Yaḥyā, strictly monitored his son’s 
behaviour, including whom he stood next to in congregational prayers in 
the mosque, who greeted him with unwarranted affection and so on.112 His 
112 Nadwī, Sawāniḥ Ḥaz̤ rat Shaykh al-Ḥadīth, 59.
230 
ALI ALTAF MIAN

  
DEBATING AUTHORITY AND AUTHENTICITY  
231
biographer, the Indian Muslim scholar Abū al-Ḥasan ʿAlī Nadwī (1914–
1999), writes:
The shaykh [Kāndhalawī] avoided social company altogether and 
concentrated all of his energy on his studies. He was not permitted 
to leave the madrasa or sit in someone’s company without the super-
vision of his father or his paternal uncle, Mawlānā Muḥammad 
Ilyās. This occasioned in him a complete disinterest in sightseeing 
and entertainment. Seclusion became his second nature.113 
These words illuminate how Kāndhalawī cultivated his aesthetic and  
ethical sensibilities through disciplinary practices, which, when coupled 
with colonial secularity, produced a compartmentalised sphere of private 
religiosity. 
The kind of intra-Sunnī ecumenism imagined by Shāh Walī Allāh did 
not inspire Kāndhalawī’s exegetical self and madrasa community. I suggest 
that this happened because the material and metaphysical union Walī Allāh 
took for granted was no longer tenable in Kāndhalawī’s circumstances. 
Instead, the latter articulated and imagined a different hope, namely, that 
his tradition – in its jurisprudential, mystical and theological dimensions –  
would survive the onslaught of colonial modernity.114 Thus, I am suggest-
ing that for some Deobandīs personal predilection merged with colonial 
compartmentalisation, affording them the opportunity to unleash their 
creative and imaginative capacities to secure what they cherished most, 
namely, the aesthetics and ethics of asceticism and its institutional support 
networks (madrasas, Sufi lodges and the Tablīghī Jamāʿat). It might prove 
fruitful for future researchers to focus on representations of subjectivity – 
those lived, and often neglected, details that historian of Sufism Alexander 
Knysh terms ‘innumerable nuances, personal predilections, pragmatic cal-
culations of one’s interest, pious reservations, and bet-hedging’.115 While 
the Deobandīs did not take up Walī Allāh’s invitation to bridge contra-
dictory epistemological gaps to secure ontological unity, they managed 
to retain what Joel Blecher describes as ‘the aura of a qualified religious 
scholar and exegete, and students’ connection with his presence’.116 As I 
conclude, I thus open this series of concerns in order to identify represen-
tations of subjectivity in genres such as hadith and Qur’an commentary  
as an investigative desideratum.
113 Nadwī, Sawāniḥ Ḥaz̤ rat Shaykh al-Ḥadīth, 59. 
114 For an earlier version of this argument with reference to Deobandī jurists, see Mian, 
‘Troubling Technology’. 
115 Knysh, Ibn ʿArabi in the Later Islamic Tradition, 277. 
116 Blecher, Said the Prophet of God, 150. For an analysis of the erotic dimensions of the 
disciple-Sufi master relationship in Deobandī Islam, see Mian, ‘Genres of Desire’. 

 Bibliography
Abd-Allah, Umar F. Mālik and Medina: Islamic Legal Reasoning in the Formative 
Period. Leiden: Brill, 2013. 
ʿAbd al-Ṣamad, Abū Bakr Yaḥyā. Taʿāruḍ al-akhbār wa-l-tarjīḥ baynahā: Dirāsa 
naẓariyya taṭbīqiyya taʾṣīliyya. Cairo: Muʾassasat al-ʿAlyāʾ, 2010.
Abū Ghudda, ʿAbd al-Fattāḥ. Tarājim sitta min fuqahāʾ al-ʿālam al-islāmī fī al-qarn 
al-rābiʿi ʿashara wa āthāruhum al-fiqhiyya. Beirut: Dār al-Bashāʾir al-Islāmiyya, 
1997. 
Abū al-Ḥājj, Muḥammad Ṣalāḥ. al-Manhaj al-fiqhhī li-l-Imām al-Laknawī. 
Amman: Dār al-Nafāʾis, 2002. 
Aḥmad, Zabīd. ‘ʿUlūm-i ḥadīth par Hindustān kī ʿArabī taʾlīfāt.’ Maʿārif 50, no. 6 
(December 1942): 417–432.
ʿAwwāma, Muḥammad. Athar al-ḥadīth al-sharīf fī ikhtilāf al-aʾimma al-fuqahāʾ. 
Medina: Dār al-Yusr, 2007.
al-ʿAẓīmabādī, Shams al-Ḥaqq and Sharaf al-Ḥaqq Muḥammad Ashraf 
al-ʿAẓīmabādī, ʿAwn al-maʿbūd sharḥ Sunan Abī Dāwūd. Edited by Yūsuf al-Ḥājj 
Aḥmad. 7 vols. Damascus: Dār al-Fayḥāʾ, 2013. 
al-Bājī, Abū al-Walīd. al-Muntaqā fī sharḥ al-Muwaṭṭaʾ fī al-fiqh wa-l-maʿānī. 
Edited by Maḥmūd Shākir. 10 vols. Beirut: Dār Iḥyāʾ al-Turāth al-ʿArabī, 2012. 
Baljon, J. M. S. Religion and Thought of Shāh Walī Allāh Dihlawī, 1703–1762. 
Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1986.
al-Banūrī, Muḥammad Yūsuf. ‘Kalima ʿan al-muʾallif.’ In al-Kāndhalawī, Awjaz 
al-masālik, 1:7–10. 15 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Fikr, 2008. 
al-Banūrī, Muḥammad Yūsuf. Maʿārif al-sunan sharḥ Sunan al-Tirmidhī. 6 vols. 
Karachi: Jāmiʿa al-ʿUlūm al-Islāmiyya, n.d.
al-Banūrī, Muḥammad Yūsuf. Nafḥat al-ʿanbar fī ḥayāt imām al-ʿaṣr al-shaykh 
Anwar. Karachi: al-Majlis al-ʿIlmī, 1969. 
Bijnawrī, Sayyid Aḥmad Raz̤ ā Khān. Anwār al-bārī: Urdū sharḥ Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī. 
19 vols. in 9 bindings. Multan: Idāra-yi Taʾlīfāt-i Ashrafiyya, n.d.
Birt, Jonathan and Philip Lewis. ‘The Pattern of Islamic Reform in Britain: The 
Deobandis Between Intra-Muslim Sectarianism and Engagement with Wider 
Society.’ In Martin van Bruinessen and Stefano Allievi (eds), Producing Islamic 
Knowledge: Transmission and Dissemination in Western Europe, pp. 91–120. 
London: Routledge, 2010.
Blecher, Joel. Said the Prophet of God: Hadith Commentary across a Millennium. 
Oakland, CA: University of California Press, 2018.
Brown, Daniel W. ‘Reappraisal.’ In Daniel W. Brown (ed.), The Wiley Blackwell 
Concise Companion to the Hadith, pp. 315–333. Hoboken, NJ and Chichester: 
Wiley Blackwell, 2020.
Brown, Daniel W. Rethinking Tradition in Modern Islamic Thought. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1996. 
Brown, Jonathan. The Canonization of al-Bukhārī and Muslim: The Formation 
and Function of the Sunnī Ḥadīth Canon. Leiden: Brill, 2007. 
al-Bukhārī, Muḥammad b. Ismāʿīl. Kitāb rafʿ al-yadayn fī al-ṣalāh. Edited by Badīʿ 
al-Dīn al-Rāshidī. Beirut: Dār Ibn Ḥazm, 1416/1996. 
232 
ALI ALTAF MIAN

  
DEBATING AUTHORITY AND AUTHENTICITY  
233
Dallal, Ahmad. Islam without Europe: Traditions of Reform in Eighteenth-Century 
Islamic Thought. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2018. 
al-Dihlawī, Shāh Walī Allāh b. ʿAbd al-Raḥīm. Ḥujjat Allāh al-bāligha. Edited by 
al-Sayyid Sābiq. 2 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Jīl, 2005. 
al-Dihlawī, Shāh Walī Allāh b. ʿAbd al-Raḥīm. al-Musawwā sharḥ al-Muwaṭṭaʾ. 2 
vols. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyya, 1403/1983.
al-Dihlawī, Shāh Walī Allāh b. ʿAbd al-Raḥīm. Shah Wali Allah of Delhi’s Hujjat 
Allah al-Baligha (The Conclusive Argument from God). Translated by Marcia 
Hermansen. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1996. 
Farmān, Mursal and Javēd Iqbāl. ‘Awjaz al-masālik sharḥ al-Muwaṭṭaʾ Imām 
Mālik: Approach and Metholodogy.’ Hazara Islamicus 5, no. 1 (2016): 39–50.
Fierro, Maribel I. ‘La polemique à propos de rafʿ al-yadayn fī al-ṣalāt dans al-Andalus.’ 
Studia Islamica 65 (1987): 69–90. 
Gangōhī, Rashīd Aḥmad and Muḥammad Yaḥyā al-Kāndhalawī. al-Kawkab 
al-durrī ʿalā Jāmiʿ al-Tirmidhī. Edited by Muḥammad Zakariyyā al-Kāndhalawī. 
4 vols. Karachi: Idārat al-Qurʾān wa-l-ʿUlūm al-Islāmiyya, 1987.
Gangōhī, Rashīd Aḥmad and Muḥammad Yaḥyā al-Kāndhalawī. Lāmiʿ al-darārī 
ʿalā Jāmiʿ al-Bukhārī. Edited by Muḥammad Zakariyyā al-Kāndhalawī. 10 vols. 
Mecca: al-Maktaba al-Imdādiyya, 1975. 
Goldziher, Ignaz. The Ẓāhirīs: Their Doctrine and their History: A Contribution 
to the History of Islamic Theology. Edited and translated by Wolfgang Behn. 
Leiden and Boston: Brill, 2008. 
Haq, M. Anwarul. The Faith Movement of Mawlana Muḥammad Ilyās. London: 
Allen and Unwin, 1972. 
al-Ḥasanī, ʿAbd al-Ḥayy. Nuzhat al-khawāṭir wa-bahjat al-masāmiʿ wa-l-nawāẓir. 
8 vols. Multan: Ṭayyab Academy, 1992. 
al-Ḥasanī, ʿAbd al-Ḥayy. al-Thaqāfa al-islāmiyya fī al-Hind. Damascus: Maṭbūʿāt 
al-Majmaʿ al-ʿIlmī al-ʿArabī, 1958. 
Haykel, Bernard. Revival and Reform in Islam: The Legacy of Muḥammad 
al-Shawkānī. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003. 
Hermansen, Marcia. ‘Said Nursi and Maulana Ilyas: Examples of Pietistic Spiri-
tuality among Twentieth-Century Islamic Movements.’ Islam and Christian-
Muslim Relations 19, no. 1 (2008): 73–88.
Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, Abū ʿUmar Yūsuf. al-Istidhkār li-madhāhib al-amṣār fī  
mā taḍammanahu al-Muwaṭṭaʾ min maʿānī al-raʾy wa-l-āthār. Edited 
by ʿAbd al-Muʿṭī Amīn al-Qalʿajī. 30 vols. Cairo: Dār Qutayba li-l-Ṭibāʿa  
wa-l-Nashr, 1993. 
Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, Abū ʿUmar Yūsuf. al-Tamhīd li-mā fī al-Muwaṭṭaʾ min al-maʿānī 
wa-l-asānīd. Cairo: al-Fārūq al-Ḥadītha, 2008. 
Ibn al-ʿArabī, Abū Bakr al-Ishbīlī al-Mālikī. ʿĀriḍat al-aḥwadhī bi-sharḥ Ṣaḥīḥ 
al-Tirmidhī. 13 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyya, n.d.
Ibn Qudāma, Abū Muḥammad ʿAbdallāh b. Aḥmad. al-Mughnī. Edited by 
ʿAbdallāh b. ʿAbd al-Muḥsin al-Turkī and ʿAbd al-Fattāḥ Muḥammad al-Ḥilw. 
15 vols. Riyadh: Dār ʿĀlam al-Kutub, 1997. 
Ingram, Brannon D. Revival from Below: The Deoband Movement and Global 
Islam. Oakland: University of California Press, 2018. 

 Isḥāq, Muḥammad. India’s Contribution to the Study of Hadith Literature. Dhaka: 
University of Dacca, 1955. 
Jalbani, G. N. Life of Shāh Waliyullāh. Lahore: Sh. Muhammad Ashraf, 1978. 
al-Kāndhalawī, Muḥammad Zakariyyā. al-Abwāb wa-l-tarājim li-Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī. 
Edited by Walī al-Dīn b. Taqī al-Dīn al-Nadawī. 6 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Bashāʾir 
al-Islāmiyya, 2012.
Kāndhalawī, Muḥammad Zakariyyā. Āp bītī. 7 vols. in 2 bindings. Karachi: Maʿhad 
al-Khalīl al-Islāmī, n.d.
al-Kāndhalawī, Muḥammad Zakariyyā. Awjaz al-masālik ilā Muwaṭṭaʾ Mālik. 15 
vols. Beirut: Dār al-Fikr, 2008. 
Kāndhalawī, Muḥammad Zakariyyā. Faz̤ āʾil-i aʿmāl. Karachi: Maktaba al-Bushrā, 
2006. 
Kāndhalawī, Muḥammad Zakariyyā. Ikhtilāf al-aʾimma. Karachi: Maktaba  
al-Shaykh, n.d.
al-Kāndhalawī, Muḥammad Zakariyyā. al-Kanz al-mutawārī fī maʿādin Lāmiʿ 
al-darārī wa Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī. 24 vols. Rawalpindi: Dār al-Khalīl, 1420[/1999–
2000]. 
Kāndhalawī, Muḥammad Zakariyyā. Kutub-i faz̤ āʾil par ishkālāt aur unkē jawābāt. 
Edited by Muḥammad Shāhid Sahāranpūrī. Karachi: Maktaba al-Shaykh, n.d.
Kāndhalawī, Muḥammad Zakariyyā. Tablīghī Jamāʿat par chand ʿumūmī iʿtirāz̤ āt 
aur unkē mufaṣṣal jawābāt. Lahore: Maktaba al-Khalīl, n.d.
Kāndhalawī, Muḥammad Zakariyyā. Taqrīr-i Bukhārī Sharīf. Karachi: Dār al-Ishāʿat, 
1988.
Kāndhalawī, Muḥammad Zakariyyā. Tārīkh-i mashāʾikh-i Chisht. Karachi: Maktaba 
al-Shaykh, n.d.
Kāndhlawī, Muḥammad Zakariyyā. The Differences of the Imāms. Translated by 
Mawlānā Muḥammad Kadwa. Santa Barbara, CA: White Thread Press, 2004.
Karagözoğlu, Mustafa Macit. ‘Commentaries.’ In Daniel W. Brown (ed.), The 
Wiley Blackwell Concise Companion to the Hadith, pp. 159–185. Hoboken, NJ 
and Chichester: Wiley Blackwell, 2020.
al-Kashmīrī, Anwar Shāh. Fayḍ al-bārī ʿalā Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī. Edited by Badr ʿĀlam 
Mīrathī. 6 vols. Quetta: al-Maktaba al-Rashīdiyya, n.d.
al-Kashmīrī, Anwar Shāh. Nayl al-farqadayn fī masʾalat rafʿ al-yadayn. In Majmūʿa 
rasāʾil al-Kashmīrī, vol. 1, pp. 159–334. 4 vols. Karachi: Idārat al-Qurʾān wa-l-
ʿUlūm al-Islāmiyya, 2004. 
Khān, Salīmullāh. Kashf al-bārī ʿammā fī Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī. Edited by Ibn al-Ḥasan 
ʿAbbāsī. Karachi: Maktaba Fārūqiyya, 1432/2001. 
Knysh, Alexander. Ibn ʿArabi in the Later Islamic Tradition: The Making of a Polemi-
cal Image in Medieval Islam. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1999. 
al-Kumillāyī, Muḥammad Ḥifẓ al-Raḥmān. al-Budūr al-maḍiyya fī tarājim 
al-Ḥanafiyya. 20 vols. Cairo: Dār al-Ṣāliḥ, 2018. 
[Mālik b. Anas.] al-Muwaṭṭaʾ. Edited and translated by Mohammad Fadel and Connell 
Monette. Cambridge, MA: Program in Islamic Law, Harvard Law School, 2019. 
Malik, Jamal. Islam in South Asia. Leiden and Boston: Brill, 2020.
Masud, Muhammad Khalid (ed.). Travellers in Faith: Studies of the Tablighi Jamaʿat 
as a Transnational Islamic Movement for Faith Renewal. Leiden: Brill, 2000. 
234 
ALI ALTAF MIAN

  
DEBATING AUTHORITY AND AUTHENTICITY  
235
Melchert, Christopher. ‘Traditionist-Jurisprudents and the Framing of Islamic 
Law.’ Islamic Law and Society 8, no. 3 (2001): 383–406. 
Metcalf, Barbara D. Islamic Contestations: Essays on Muslims in India and Pakistan. 
New Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2004. 
Metcalf, Barbara D. Islamic Revival in British India: Deoband, 1860–1900. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1982. 
Metcalf, Barbara D. ‘Living Hadith in the Tablighi Jamaat.’ Journal of Asian Studies 
52, no. 3 (1993): 584–608. 
Metcalf, Barbara D. ‘The Past in the Present: Instruction, Pleasure, and Blessing in 
Maulana Muhammad Zakariyya’s Aap Biitii.’ In Islamic Contestations: Essays 
on Muslims in India and Pakistan, pp. 67–95. New Delhi: Oxford University 
Press, 2004.
Mian, Ali Altaf. ‘South Asian Salafism: Islamic Reform in the Ahl-i Ḥadīth Move-
ment.’ In Natana DeLong-Bas and Emad Hamdeh (eds), Oxford Handbook on 
Islamic Reform. New York: Oxford University Press (forthcoming).
Mian, Ali Altaf. ‘Genres of Desire: The Erotic in Deobandī Islam.’ History of 
Religions 59, no. 2 (2019): 108–145.
Mian, Ali Altaf. ‘Troubling Technology: The Deobandī Debate on the Loudspeaker 
and Ritual Prayer.’ Islamic Law and Society 24, no. 4 (2017): 355–383. 
Mīrathī, Muḥammad ʿĀshiq Ilāhī. Tazkirat-ul-Khalīl. Karachi: Maktaba al-Shaykh, 
n.d.
Mīrathī, Muḥammad ʿĀshiq Ilāhī. Tazkirat-ur-Rashīd. Lahore: Idāra-yi Islāmiyyāt, 
1986. 
Moosa, Ebrahim. What is a Madrasa? Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina 
Press, 2015. 
al-Mubārakfūrī, Muḥammad ʿAbd al-Raḥmān. Tuḥfat al-aḥwadhī bi-sharḥ Jāmiʿ 
al-Tirmidhī. Edited by Yūsuf al-Ḥājj Aḥmad. 10 vols. Damascus: Dār al-Fayḥāʾ, 
2011.
al-Nadawī, Muḥammad Akram. Shiblī Nuʿmānī ʿallāmat al-Hind al-adīb wa-l-
muʾarrikh al-nāqid al-arīb. Damascus: Dār al-Qalam, 2001. 
al-Nadawī, Muḥammad Raḥmat Allāh Muḥammad Nāẓim. al-Muḥaddith al-kabīr 
al-dāʿiyat al-jalīl al-Shaykh Muḥammad Zakariyyā al-Kāndhalawī: Ḥayātuhu 
wa-juhūduhu al-ʿilmiyya wa-l-taʿrīf bi-ahammi muʾallafātihi. Beirut: Dār 
al-Bashāʾir al-Islāmiyya, 2012. 
Nadwī, Fīroz Akhtar. Zikr-i Zakariyyā. Azamgarh: Markaz al-Shaykh Abī al-Ḥasan 
al-Nadwī, Jāmiʿa Islāmiyya Muẓaffarpūr, 2005.
Nadwī, Sayyid Abū al-Ḥasan ʿAlī. Sawāniḥ Ḥaz̤ rat Mawlānā Muḥammad Ilyās 
Kāndhalawī. New Delhi: Idāra-yi Ishāʿat-i Dīniyāt, n.d.
Nadwī, Sayyid Abū al-Ḥasan ʿAlī. Sawāniḥ Ḥaz̤ rat Shaykh al-Ḥadīth Mawlānā 
Muḥammad Zakariyyā. Karachi: Majlis Nashriyāt-i Islām, n.d. 
Nadwī, Sayyid Sulaymān. Ḥayāt-i Shiblī. Azamgarh, India: Dār al-Muṣannifīn 
Shiblī Academy, 1993.
Nadwī, Taqī al-Dīn. Muḥaddithīn-i ʿiẓām awr unkē kārnāmay. Karachi: Majlis-i 
Nashriyāt-i Islām, 2000.
Nadwī, Taqī al-Dīn. ‘Muqaddima.’ In Kāndhalawī, Taqrīr-i Bukhārī Sharīf, 27–34. 
Karachi: Dār al-Ishāʿat, 1988.

 Naqshbandī, Muḥammad Rūḥullāh. Shaikh al-ḥadīth Ḥaẓrat Mawlānā Muḥammad 
Zakariyyā Ṣāḥib Sahānpūrī kī dīnī wa ʿilmī khidmāt. Lahore: Maktabat 
ul-Ḥaramayn, 2013.
Nāṣir, Muḥammad ʿAmmār Khān. ‘Fiqh al-ḥadīth men aʾimma-yi aḥnāf kā uṣūlī 
manhaj.’ PhD dissertation, Punjab University, 2018. 
Nawshahrawī, Abū Yaḥyā Imām Khān. Tarājim ʿulamāʾ-yi Ahl-i Ḥadīth Hind. 
Karachi: Maktaba-yi Ahl-i Ḥadīth, n.d.
Nuʿmānī, Shiblī. Maqālāt-i Shiblī. 3 vols. Azamgarh, India: Dār al-Muṣannifīn 
Shiblī Academy, 1999. 
Nuʿmānī, Shiblī. Sīrat-un-Nuʿmān. Agra: Maṭbaʿ Mufīd-i ʿĀm, 1892. 
Ogunnaike, Oludamini. ‘Annihilation in the Messenger Revisited: Clarifications 
on a Contemporary Sufi Practice and Its Precedents.’ Journal of Islamic and 
Muslim Studies 1, no. 2 (2016): 13–34.
Preckel, Claudia. ‘Ahl-i Ḥadīth’, in EI3. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1163/1573–3912_
ei3_COM_0107>, accessed 1 June 2020. 
Qureshi, Jawad Anwar. ‘Reform.’ In Daniel W. Brown (ed.), The Wiley Blackwell 
Concise Companion to the Hadith, pp. 297–313. Hoboken, NJ and Chichester: 
Wiley Blackwell, 2020.
Riexinger, Martin. ‘Ibn Taymiya’s Worldview and the Challenge of Modernity: 
A Conflict Among the Ahl-i Ḥadīth in British India.’ In Birgit Krawietz and 
Georges Tamer (eds), Islamic Theology, Philosophy and Law: Debating Ibn 
Taymiyya and Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya, pp. 493–517. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 
2013. 
Riexinger, Martin. Sana’ullah Amritsari (1868–1948) und die Ahl-i Hadis im Pun-
jab unter britischer Herrschaft. Wurzburg: Ergon, 2004. 
Riexinger, Martin. ‘A Study of the Ahl-i Hadīs in Late Nineteenth/Early Twentieth 
Century South Asia.’ In Gwilym Beckerlegge (ed.), Colonialism, Modernity and 
Religious Identities: Religious Reform Movements in South Asia, pp. 147–165. 
New Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2008. 
Ṣafdar, Muḥammad Sarfarāz Khān. Maqām-i Abī Ḥanīfa. Gujranwala: Maktaba-yi 
Ṣafdariyya, 2001.
al-Sahāranfūrī, Khalīl Aḥmad. Badhl al-majhūd fī ḥall Sunan Abī Dāwūd. Edited 
by Taqī al-Dīn al-Nadawī. 14 vols. Azamgarh, India: Markaz al-Shaykh Abīʾl-
Ḥasan al-Nadawī, 2006. 
Sahāranpūrī, Sayyid Muḥammad Shāhid. Fihrist-i Taʾlīfāt-i Shaykh. 3 vols. Saha-
ranpur: Maktaba-yi Yadgār-i Shaykh, 1997.
Sahāranpūrī, Sayyid Muḥammad Shāhid. Ḥayāt-i Shaykh. 2 vols. Saharanpur: 
Maktaba-yi Yādgār-i Shaykh, 2003.
Schacht, Joseph. The Origins of Muhammadan Jurisprudence. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1979. 
al-Shaybānī, Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan. Muwaṭṭaʾ al-Imām Mālik, riwāyat Muḥammad 
b. al-Ḥasan al-Shaybānī, maʿa al-taʿlīq al-mumajjad ʿalā Muwaṭṭaʾ Muḥammad 
sharḥ ʿAbd al-Ḥayy al-Laknawī. Edited by Taqī al-Dīn al-Nadawī. 3 vols. Damas-
cus: Dār al-Qalam, 2011. 
Sikand, Yoginder. The Origins and Development of the Tablighi-Jama‘at (1920–2000): 
A Cross-Country Comparative Study. New Delhi: Orient Longman, 2002. 
236 
ALI ALTAF MIAN

  
DEBATING AUTHORITY AND AUTHENTICITY  
237
Siyālkōtī, Muḥammad Ibrāhīm Mīr. Tārīkh-i Ahl-i Ḥadīth. Lahore: Islamic Pub-
lishing Company, 1970. 
Stephens, Julia. Governing Islam: Law, Empire, and Secularism in Modern South 
Asia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2018. 
al-Tahānawī, Ẓafar Aḥmad al-ʿUthmānī. Iʿlāʾ al-sunan. 21 vols. Beirut: Dār  
al-Fikr, 2001. 
al-Ṭaḥāwī, Abū Jaʿfar. Sharḥ maʿānī al-āthār. Edited by Muḥammad Zuhrī al-Najjār 
and Muḥammad Sayyid Jād al-Ḥaqq. 5 vols. Beirut: ʿĀlam al-Kutub, 1994. 
Tareen, SherAli. Defending Muḥammad in Modernity. Notre Dame, IN: Univer-
sity of Notre Dame Press, 2020. 
Thānawī, Ashraf ʿAlī. al-Iqtiṣād fī al-taqlīd wa-l-ijtihād. Karachi: Qadīmī Kutub 
Khāna, n.d.
Turkmānī, ʿAbd al-Majīd. Dirāsāt fī uṣūl al-ḥadītā ʿalā manhaj al-Ḥanafiyya. Kara-
chi: Madrasa al-Nuʿmān, 2009. 
ʿUsmānī, Muḥammad Taqī. Dars-i Tirmidhī. 3 vols. Karachi: Maktaba-yi Dār 
al-ʿUlūm Karāchī, 2001. 
ʿUsmānī, Ẓafar Aḥmad. ‘Silsila-yi Shāh Walīullāh kī khidmat-i Ḥadīth.’ Maʿārif 53, 
no. 3 (May 1944): 340–354; 53, no. 6 (June 1944): 405–420. 
al-ʿUthmānī, Shabbīr Aḥmad. Fatḥ al-mulhim bi-ṣharḥ Ṣaḥīḥ al-Imām Muslim. 
Edited by Nūr al-Bashar b. Nūr al-Ḥaqq. Karachi: Maktaba Dār al-ʿUlūm 
Karātshī, 1421/2000.
Wheeler, Brannon. ‘Touching the Penis in Islamic Law.’ History of Religions 44, no. 
2 (2004): 89–119.
Zaman, Muhammad Qasim. ‘Commentaries, Print and Patronage: ‘Hadith’ and 
the Madrasas in Modern South Asia.’ Bulletin of the School of Oriental and 
African Studies 61, no. 2 (1999): 60–81. 
Zaman, Muhammad Qasim. Modern Islamic Thought in a Radical Age: Religious 
Authority and Internal Criticism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012. 
Zaman, Muhammad Qasim. ‘Political Power, Religious Authority, and the  
Caliphate in Eighteenth-Century Indian Islamic Thought.’ Journal of the Royal 
Asiatic Society 30, no. 2 (2020): 313–340.
Zaman, Muhammad Qasim. The Ulama in Contemporary Islam: Custodians of 
Change. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2002.

 CHAPTER 9
ʿAllāma Ṭabāṭabāʾī and Exegetical 
Hadiths in al-Mīzān: A Contemporary 
Imāmī Commentary on Hadith?
Shadi Nafisi*
ʿAllāma Muḥammad Ḥusayn Ṭabāṭabāʾī (1320–1402/1903–1981)1 was a 
contemporary Iranian philosopher, mystic, theologian, exegete and promi-
nent scholar on hadith. He was a master of the Islamic traditional sciences, 
received ijāzas in narrating and interpreting hadith, attained the rank of 
mujtahid and mastered Islamic philosophy according to the school of Mullā 
Ṣadrā.2 He dedicated his scholastic life to teaching and writing on two sub-
jects that had been overlooked in the traditional seminary curriculum: phi-
losophy and exegesis. His lifetime effort in these fields sparked a revival of 
Islamic philosophy in contemporary Iran and led him to write the twenty-
volume Qur’an commentary al-Mīzān fī tafsīr al-Qurʾān, a work that is con-
sidered the most important contemporary Shīʿī exegesis.3 
 * Associate professor at the Department of Hadith and Qur’anic sciences, University 
of Tehran (shadinafisi@ut.ac.ir). I would like to thank Stefanie Brinkmann and Joel 
Blecher for their constructive support.
 1 For further information about Ṭabāṭabāʾī, see Medoff, ‘Ṭabāṭabāʾī, Moḥammad-Ḥosayn’, 
EIr, <http://www.iranicaonline.org/articles/tabatabai-mohammad-hosayn> (accessed 1 
July 2020); Medoff, ‘Ijtihad and Renewal’, ii–vi, 1–20; Algar, ‘ʿAllāma Sayyid Muḥammad 
Ḥusayn Ṭabāṭabāʾī’, 326–351; Kamaly, God and Man in Tehran, 138–144; Ṭabāṭabāʾī, 
Shiʿite Islam, 21–25; Ehteshami and Rizvi, ‘Beyond the Letter’, 444–448. For a list of  
primary sources on Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s biography, see Medoff, ‘Ijtihad and Renewal’, 139–145.
 2 That is, Ṣadr al-Dīn Muḥammad b. Ibrāhīm Shirāzī, best known as Mullā Ṣadrā Shirāzī 
(1045/1635–36?), a Shīʿī philosopher of the Ṣafavid period and arguably the most signifi-
cant Islamic philosopher after Ibn Sīnā. For his ideas, see Rizvi, ‘Mollā Ṣadrā Širāzi’, EIr, 
<http://www.iranicaonline.org/articles/molla-sadra-sirazi> (accessed 1 August 2020). 
 3 Six volumes of this exegesis have been translated into English by Sayyid Saeed Akhtar Rizvi 
and published in twelve volumes. After Rizvi’s death, his son finished the incomplete thir-
teenth volume. The remainder has been translated by Tawus Raja, including volumes 14 to 
16 and 25 to 30. Rizvi’s translation, although useful, is not very precise; see Medoff, ‘Ijtihad 
and Renewal’, x. Its popularity is clear from the number of dissertations (MA/PhD) focused 

  
ʿALLĀMA ṬABĀṬABĀʾĪ AND EXEGETICAL HADITHS 
239
Ṭabāṭabāʾī is also considered an eminent hadith scholar. His approach 
and works on hadith were deeply influenced by his interest in philoso-
phy and tafsīr. For Ṭabāṭabāʾī, philosophical knowledge is indispensable 
for the correct understanding of hadiths on creed. For ten years, he held 
classes on the hadiths in Biḥār al-anwār (lit., The seas of light), compiled 
by the Ṣafavid scholar Muḥammad Bāqir al-Majlisī (d. 1111/1700)4 and 
supervised its new edition. He wrote glosses on the book, often providing 
further information or correcting al-Majlisī’s misunderstanding of specific 
hadiths. He considered al-Majlisī’s misunderstanding to be a result of his 
ignorance of hadiths with philosophical content; Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s sharp criti-
cism of al-Majlisī’s hadith commentaries provoked discontent among reli-
gious authorities in Qum.5 Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s novel glosses were limited to the 
first six volumes and a part of the seventh volume. He also had a few brief 
comments on al-Kāfī of Muḥammad al-Kulaynī (d. 329/941)6 in which he  
explained difficult concepts such as badāʾ (the appearance of change in  
the divine will), free will and predestination, and the difference between 
the divine will (irāda) and the divine wish (mashiya).7 
Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s works on tafsīr included hadith. In fact, hadith is the 
focus of concern in his brief (but incomplete) commentary on the Qur’an 
entitled al-Bayān fī muwāfiqat bayn al-ḥadīth wa-l-Qurʾān (The elucida-
tion on consistency [between] hadith and the Qur’an). This commentary, 
which reaches Surat Yūsuf (12:57),8 was published after his death. His most 
important work on hadith is ‘the hadith discussion’ (baḥth rivāyī) in his 
Qur’an exegesis, al-Mīzān fī tafsīr al-Qurʾān. The Mīzān is Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s 
major project, on which his reputation largely rests. In contrast with 
some of his predecessors who commented on the Qur’an verse by verse, 
Ṭabāṭabāʾī divides the verses into several groups according to the length 
of the chapter. He then clarifies the apparent meaning of each group of 
verses in a section entitled ‘explanation’ (bayān), which is usually followed 
by separate ‘discussions’ (baḥth) on relevant hadiths or social, scientific, 
historical, philosophical and ethical implications of the verses. 
In his exegesis, the ‘hadith discussion’ (baḥth rivāyī) occurs most fre-
quently, following the ‘explanation’ (bayān). These sections on hadith 
on his views. In the largest repository for Iranian theses (irandoc), 1,057 dissertations have 
been registered under the keyword ‘al-Mīzān’, and 304 appear under the keyword ‘ʿAllama 
Ṭabāṭabāʾī’; see <https://ganj.irandoc.ac.ir/#/> (accessed 12 August 2020).
 4 ʿĀbidī, ‘Nigāhī bi taʿlīqāt-i ʿAllāma Ṭabāṭabāʾī’, 670.
 5 Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s annotations have also been subject to criticism; see ʿĀbidī, ‘Nigāhī bi 
taʿlīqāt-i ʿAllāma Ṭabāṭabāʾī’, 669–685.
 6 For the book and his author, see Amir-Moezzi and Ansari, ‘Perfecting a Religion’, 125–160.
 7 Sayyid ʿAlavī, ‘Mitud-i naqd’, 21–25; Ḥusaynī Ṭihrānī, Mihr-i tābān, 36; Algar, ‘ʿAllāma 
Sayyid Muḥammad Ḥusayn Ṭabāṭabāʾī’, 340–341.
 8 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Bayān, 28. 

 240 
SHADI NAFISI
cover about one-sixth of the twenty-volume commentary of al-Mīzān 
fī tafsīr al-Qurʾān and make up 530 specific sections9 in which he refers 
to numerous Shīʿī and Sunnī hadith collections.10 Among Shīʿī sources, 
Ṭabāṭabāʾī quotes al-Kāfī most frequently (in 730 references), while al-
Durr al-manthūr fī al-tafsīr bi-l-maʾthūr, compiled by Jalāl al-Dīn al-Suyūṭī  
(d. 911/1505),11 is the most frequently quoted Sunnī hadith source (with 
1,058 references). The hadith section comprises hadiths that, without 
exception, pertain to Qur’anic verses or phrases. 
Ṭabāṭabāʾī frequently cites hadiths without further comment. In many 
instances (nearly 2,500 occasions)12 he provides explanatory notes that are 
brief and mainly fall into one of the three following categories:13 
1.  Variations of a hadith with alternative isnāds and sources (this is 
the most frequent information given). Without discussing the con-
tent in detail, Ṭabāṭabāʾī simply states that the relevant hadith has 
other versions that were transmitted by Shīʿī or Sunnī narrators 
and/or that the hadith has numerous chains of transmission.14 
2.  Explanations of the meaning of the hadith. Here, Ṭabāṭabāʾī  
seldom discusses the lexical meaning15 or gives grammatical expli-
cations, instead he provides explanatory comments on numer-
ous hadiths, pointing out their implications and/or clarifying 
difficult and at times controversial topics. Among these topics16 
are the hadiths on the greatest name of God and His speak-
ing;17 seeing God;18 the throne (ʿarsh) and its description;19 the 
angels and Satan and their nature;20 the world of pre-existence  
(ʿālam al-dahr);21 the ascension of the Prophet (miʿrāj)22 and his 
 9 Nāṣih, ‘Pajūhishī’, 56.
10 Awsī counts up to 135 sources: Awsī, Ravish ʿAllāma Ṭabāṭabāʾī, 124–129.
11 For the author, see Geoffroy, ‘al-Suyūṭī’, in EI2, 9:913–916.
12 His annotations usually begin with an introductory ‘I say’ (aqūlu). 
13 In the first volume alone, there are forty hadith discussions with more than 140 comments. 
In nearly ninety cases he explains the hadith; his criticism is limited to two instances  
on the story of Hārūt and Mārūt and on the hadiths concerning insāʾ (postponing  
the sacred month). In the remaining cases, he mentions the variants of the hadiths.
14 For a few examples, see al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 1:39, 2:438, 3:143, 16:281, 18:13.
15 For some of these rare instances, see al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 2:58 and 146.
16 For a study on Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s view on these topics, see Nafisi, ʿAllāma Ṭabāṭabāʾī va 
ḥadīth, 294–401. The references in the following footnotes are only the most important 
instances of this. 
17 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 2:254–255.
18 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 8:256–258, 260; 19:34–35. 
19 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 10:180; 14:128–134.
20 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 1:237, 8:62–66, 9:109, 14:36–41, 17:13.
21 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 8:324–331.
22 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 8:30–35; 19:36. 

 intercession (shafāʿa);23 the problematic hadiths concerning the 
nature of those enjoying felicity and the wretched in the hereaf-
ter;24 free will and predestination (ikhtiyār, jabr).25 Although had-
iths addressing theological issues are significant in Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s 
hadith discussions, they are not the only issues on which he has 
written glosses. Legal hadiths are also addressed and glossed 
briefly.26 Contemporary Shīʿī scholars consider his annotations 
on exegetical hadiths27 referring to the Shīʿī Imams greatly signifi-
cant. As they are esoteric in nature, this group of hadiths has gen-
erally been accepted by scholars and not discussed further. Thus, 
Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s interpretation of this group of hadiths was some-
thing new and changed the status of these hadith in relation to the 
Qur’an (see below). 
3.  Criticism of exegetical hadiths mentioned in other Qur’anic 
commentaries. Emphasising matn criticism, Ṭabāṭabāʾī offers 
his opinion on the authenticity of a wide range of hadiths, par-
ticularly regarding their possible conflict with the teachings of 
the Qur’an, the confirmed (qaṭʿī) Sunna, reason (ʿaql), history 
(tārīkh), science (ʿilm), and reality (wāqiʿ).28 At times, he evaluates 
the isnād but he never refutes or accepts a hadith solely based on 
its isnād (see more below). Among the various exegetical tradi-
tions discussed in the Mīzān, those concerning Qur’anic stories 
and the occasions of the revelation (asbāb al-nuzūl) have been 
largely refuted. Although there is a long history29 of Shīʿīs writing  
23 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 1:174–183. 
24 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 1:121, 1:290–291, 8:95–109. 
25 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 1:97–105.
26 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 2:252 (on divorce); 5:234 (on ablution); 4:289–311 (on tem-
porary marriage).
27 ‘Exegetical hadith’ refers to hadiths that explain one or several Qur’anic verses, either by 
explicitly quoting the verse or by implicitly referring to its subject.
28 For a detailed study of his hadith criticism, see Nafisi, ʿAllāma Ṭabāṭabāʾī va ḥadīth, 
477–523. 
29 One might argue that the practice of hadith commentary is applied in three of the four 
canonical Shīʿī hadith collections (fourth/tenth to fifth/eleventh century); see Gleave, 
‘Between Hadith and Fiqh’, 353. In addition to these books, one of the earliest com-
mentaries on hadith is that of Sharīf al-Murtaḍā (d. 436/1044), Amālī al-Murtaḍā. 
Among the numerous works of Shaykh al-Mufīd (d. 413/1022) there are three books 
(no longer extant) on the meaning of a particular hadith: the prophetic hadith about the 
Companions being like stars, the status of ʿAlī for the Prophet being like that of Aaron 
for Moses and the two weighty things; see Najāshī, Rijāl al-Najāshī, 401. Ibn Rāvandī 
(d. 573/1177) was a pioneer who wrote the first commentary on Nahj al-balāgha. 
Finally, in the Ṣafavid era (907–1135/1501–1722), writing commentaries on hadith  
collections gained popularity; see Blecher ‘Ḥadīth Commentary’, in EI3, <http://dx.doi.
org/10.1163/1573-3912_ei3_COM_32080> (accessed 6 February 2021).
 
ʿALLĀMA ṬABĀṬABĀʾĪ AND EXEGETICAL HADITHS 
241

 commentaries on hadith collections, criticising the matn of had-
iths is not a well-established Shīʿī practice. Hence, Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s 
methodological approach gained much attention. 
The first two approaches, discussing versions of hadiths and their isnāds as 
well as the meaning, implications and difficulties, related to their content  
are common in hadith commentaries.30 Although some commentators might 
assume that the hadiths they discuss are authentic and they depend on the 
compilers in relation to this, others critically examine the matns and isnāds. 
Such (sometimes) exhaustive and detailed critical examinations of trans-
missions and their subsequent evaluation of hadiths usually fall under the 
category of hadith criticism. Hence, to what extent can we consider hadith 
criticism a part of hadith commentary? 
We can find hadith criticism, to a certain extent, in some hadith com-
mentaries. One of these is Mirʾāt al-ʿuqūl (a multi-volume commentary 
on al-Kāfī) by Muḥammad Bāqir al-Majlisī (d. 1111/1700). In his sharḥ, 
al-Majlisī evaluates isnāds that are often deemed weak, and then dis-
cusses the content of the hadiths.31 Despite his evaluations, he almost 
never criticises the text (matn), and it would seem that he does not refute 
hadiths. This kind of isnād criticism and evaluation can be found in other 
Shīʿī hadith commentaries.32 In the Manhaj al-naqd fī ʿulūm al-ḥadīth, 
Nūr al-Dīn ʿItr (1937–2020) introduces what can be considered a sharḥ. 
Although he does not specifically mention hadith criticism (naqd) as a 
branch of sharḥ, he includes books on conflicting (mukhtalaf)33 hadiths 
as one kind of sharḥ. In these works on mukhtalaf, the author’s intention 
is to resolve the apparent contradiction between diverging hadiths. Abro-
gation (naskh) is one method of resolving these apparent contradictions. 
Another method involves refuting the authenticity of a hadith or prefer-
ring one hadith over another based on its isnād. Among the mukhtalaf 
books in jurisprudence (fiqh) is al-Istibṣār fīmā ikhtulifa min al-akhbār 
and the second is Tahdhīb al-aḥkām both by Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan 
al-Ṭūsī (d. 460/1067); these are two of the four canonical hadith books 
in the Shīʿī tradition. Al-Ṭūsī himself criticises the authenticity of some  
30 Blecher ‘Ḥadīth Commentary’, in EI3, <http://dx.doi.org/10.1163/1573-3912_ei3_COM_ 
32080> (accessed 6 February 2021). 
31 In 4,830 instances he considers the hadiths weak. 
32 Isnād criticism can be seen in many hadith commentaries on the four canonical Shīʿī 
hadith collections; among these commentaries are Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan b. al-Shahīd 
al-Thānī al-ʿĀmilī’s (d. 1030/1620) Istiqṣāʾ al-iʿtibār fī sharḥ al-istibṣār and Muḥammad 
Taqī al-Majlisī’s (d. 1070/1660) Rawḍa al-muttaqīn fī sharḥ man lā yahḍarahū al-faqīh. 
33 He mentions that it is also called a ‘difficult hadith’ (mushkil al-ḥadīth). He defines it 
as a hadith that shows an apparent conflict with principles, with other hadiths, or the 
Qurʼanic texts. ʿItr, Manhaj al-naqd, 337.
242 
SHADI NAFISI

 of the hadiths collected in these works;34 later commentators have made 
the same criticism.35 In this sense, commentary on hadiths includes mate-
rial typically understood as hadith criticism.
Regarding the quantity and the nature of his comments, Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s 
annotations on the exegetical hadiths in the Mīzān can be considered 
a sharḥ. The Mīzān is not the only tafsīr that includes and discusses had-
iths. In terms of hadith commentary within Qur’an commentary, we must 
distinguish between the various ways hadiths are included in tafsīr. Many 
traditional exegeses (tafāsīr) gather a great number of hadiths; these works 
are known as tafsīr bi-l-maʾthūr. Examples of this type of Qur’an commen-
tary include works written by the Sunnī Ibn Abī Ḥātim al-Rāzī (d. 327/938) 
and the Shīʿī scholar Sayyid Hāshim al-Baḥrānī (d. 1107/1695). But often 
these authors do not comment on the hadiths collected in these exegeses, 
and the absence of any commentary on the hadiths makes them, at most, 
a selective collection of hadith, but not a hadith commentary. Like hadith 
collections, these exegeses only demonstrate their authors’ choice of had-
iths. Yet the classification of hadiths under the topic of a particular Qur’an 
verse may be considered a commentarial activity, like a hadith compiler who 
classifies hadiths under a specific chapter heading (tarājim).36 By contrast, 
exegetes such as Muḥammad b. Ḥasan al-Ṭūsī (d. 460/1067),37 Ibn Kathīr (d. 
774/1373), Maḥmūd al-Ālūsī (d. 1270/1854),38 and others discuss (exhaus-
tively) the meaning or the authority of specific exegetical hadiths. Because 
they usually adopt a critical stance, these comments can be considered had-
ith analysis, or commentary. However, identifying these discussions in the 
often voluminous Qur’an commentaries is not an easy task. The Mīzān is 
unique for including a large number and variety of comments on hadith, and 
for separating the hadith discussion from other parts of his tafsīr; this means 
it is possible to discern and separate Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s commentaries on hadiths.
Should Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s separate hadith discussions and this kind of com-
mentary on exegetical hadiths be classified under tafsīr or hadith? Each 
hadith has at least two aspects. It can be discussed under the general topic 
of hadith, but its subject may also include other disciplines,39 such as  
34 See, for example, al-Ṭūsī, Tahdhīb al-aḥkām, 1:18, 6:168, 7:361, 9:204; al-Ṭūsī, 
al-Istibṣār, 1:237, 2:36, 3:351, 4:89.
35 In reconciling the conflicting hadiths, the commentators do not necessarily adopt the 
same method as al-Ṭūsī; see, for example, al-ʿĀmilī, Istiqṣāʾ al-iʿtibār, 7:13. 
36 This classification has been considered a kind of commentary; see Blecher, Said the 
Prophet of God, 5.
37 For some examples, see al-Ṭūsī, al-Tibyān, 1:384, 2:422–423, 8:554.
38 For some examples, see al-Dhahabī, al-Isrāʾīlīyyāt, 107–147. 
39 ʿItr, Manhaj al-naqd, 198–199. The line between these disciplines is not necessarily 
clear; there are overlaps, particularly concerning exegetical hadiths that address rel-
evant Qur’anic verses. 
 
ʿALLĀMA ṬABĀṬABĀʾĪ AND EXEGETICAL HADITHS 
243

 theology, law, history or Qur’an commentary. These, in turn, can be divided 
into more specific sub-categories. Hence, in varying degrees, the integra-
tion, application and discussion of hadiths is part of a discipline other than 
hadith. Examining the authenticity of hadiths and their meanings is a core 
part of the discipline of hadith; Yet similar questions and approaches can 
be found in other disciplines, such as Qur’an commentary, theology, law 
or ethics. Exegetes such as Ibn Taymiyya, who saw hadith as key to many 
disciplines, including tafsīr, referred to hadith in their exegesis to a signifi-
cant extent.40 Others approached tafsīr and included fewer discussions of 
hadiths in their argumentation.41 This interrelation of hadith and tafsīr has 
been noted by modern scholars.42 
In relation to Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s commentaries on hadith, he does not define 
his hadith discussions as one of his objectives for writing the Mīzān. Nev-
ertheless, his hadith analysis has been considered a great contribution to 
the field of hadith comprehension (fiqh al-ḥadīth), and many studies have 
been written on it.43 But to properly understand his approach to hadith, it 
is essential to understand his principles of exegesis. Thus, I discuss two of 
his basic exegetical principles, as they have a critical impact on his hadith 
analysis and are distinct even among his Shīʿī counterparts.
The Principles of Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s Commentary on  
Hadith in the Mīzān 
Ṭabāṭabāʾī does not outline his principles and methods of hadith com-
mentary in the Mīzān (or in any of his other books), rather his state-
ments on the above-mentioned topics are scattered throughout his books,  
40 See Ibn Taymiyya, Muqaddama fī uṣūl al-tafsīr, 38–79. He discusses the authoritative 
hadiths and their implications for Qur’anic exegesis.
41 As an example, see al-ʿAk, Uṣūl al-tafsīr, 123–135. Of his nearly five-hundred-page book, 
he dedicates only a few pages to a discussion of interpreting the Qurʼan through hadiths.
42 For example, see Herbert Berg’s discussion of early exegesis: Berg, The Development of 
Exegesis. Chapter 2 (6–65) is devoted to hadith; the other chapters relate to exegetical 
hadiths as the prominent form of tafsīr in early Islam. Also see Marston R. Speight’s 
article, ‘The Function of Hadith’. 
43 His hadith commentaries have been discussed with a focus on three aspects: his prin-
ciples of hadith comprehension (his premises); his methods (the measures he takes to 
reach the correct meaning of the hadith); and his interpretations. (There is not neces-
sarily a sharp line between these three aspects, but the emphasis in publications on this 
issue differs.) Studying Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s interpretation of a specific issue in the framework of 
hadith and Qurʼan (separately or together) is a common focus among modern scholars. 
His methods have been scrutinised in several studies, though studies dedicated to his 
principles are less common. In Western studies of this tafsīr, Medoff, and Ehteshami/
Rizvi have also discussed Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s position about the role of hadith in the interpre-
tation of the Qurʼan; see Medoff, ‘Ijtihad and Renewal’, 45–60; Ehteshami and Rizvi, 
‘Beyond the Letter’, 463–467.
244 
SHADI NAFISI

 notably in the ‘hadith discussion’ (baḥth riwāyī) of his Mīzān. ʿA. Zāriʿī 
discusses the principles of Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s use of hadith in the interpretation 
of the Qur’an and notes the following six principles: (1) the importance of 
ahl al-bayt44 to commentaries on the Qurʼan, (2) the interpretation of the 
Qur’an by hadith, (3) the interpretation of the Qur’an by the Qur’an itself, 
(4) adaptation (taṭbīq) of exegetical hadiths (on taṭbīq see more below), 
(5) prioritising the matn of a hadith over its isnād and (6) prioritising 
the Qur’an over the hadith.45 In general, Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s principles have also 
been addressed (to various degrees) in other studies dedicated to hadith 
in al-Mīzān.46 
Among the most basic principles in Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s use of hadith are his 
rejection of the authority of isolated hadith (khabar al-wāḥid),47 and his 
view about the Prophet and the ahl al-bayt and their role as interpreters of 
the Qur’an. His view on isolated hadith has been subject to much debate as 
it is not accepted by most contemporary Shīʿī scholars.48 This first principle 
determines many of his other principles, and is discussed below.
Rejecting the Probative Proof (ḥujjiya) of Isolated Hadith  
(Khabar Al-wāḥid) in Fields other than Islamic Law (Fiqh) 
Like most Muslim scholars, Ṭabāṭabāʾī maintains the probative force 
(ḥujjiya) of mutawātir traditions and those hadiths in which further evi-
dence leads scholars to consider them authentic in the field of Islamic 
law (fiqh) and creed (ʿaqāʾid).49 By contrast, the authority of isolated 
hadiths has been the subject of much debate throughout the history of 
Shīʿī thought. Some generally dismiss them as invalid,50 while others only  
44 The ahl al-bayt are the Twelve Shīʿī Imams along with the Prophet’s daughter Fāṭima; 
see Howard, ‘Ahl-e Bayt’, EIr, I/6, 635.
45 Zāriʿī, ‘Barrisī mabānī ʻAllāma Ṭabāṭabāʾī’. This is the only study that explicitly mentions 
Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s principles in his approach to hadith. 
46 For example, see Maʿārif, ‘Ḥadīth’; Naṣīrī and Naṣīrī, ‘Dīdgāh-hayi’; Mīrī, ‘Darāmadī’.
47 Khabar al-wāḥid and khabar al-mutawātir are quantitative criteria for assessing trans-
missions. A hadith that is khabar al-wāḥid falls short of the predicate mutawātir (a 
hadith with multiple chains of transmission), in that it has only one or a few transmit-
ters in every ṭabaqa (stage) of its isnād; see Juynboll, ‘Khabar al-wāḥid’, in EI2, 4:896; 
Juynboll, ‘Tawātur’, in EI2, 10:381; Wensinck and Heinrichs, ‘Mutawātir’, in EI2, 7:781. 
There is no agreement on the English equivalent for the term khabar al-wāḥid. Many 
scholars use the transliterated form of the phrase, while others use ‘solitary’ or ‘single’. 
Schacht defines it as a hadith transmitted by ‘isolated individuals’ and thus shortens it 
to ‘isolated’. Although ‘solitary’ and ‘single’ correspond more closely to the literal mean-
ing of the word, ‘isolated’ is more consistent with the technical usage of the term in the 
hadith sciences; see Schacht, ‘Ahl al-Ḥadīth’, in EI2, 1:258.
48 For example, see Qāḍīzādi and al-Jaʿfarī, ‘Ḥujjiyya al-ḥadīth’.
49 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 10:351, 14:133.
50 Ḥubbullah, Naẓariyat al-sunna, 67–97.
 
ʿALLĀMA ṬABĀṬABĀʾĪ AND EXEGETICAL HADITHS 
245

 prohibit their use in the realm of creed.51 Ṭabāṭabāʾī is considered the 
most prominent scholar in the contemporary Shīʿī world to confine 
the application of khabar al-wāḥid hadith exclusively to Islamic law.52 
He briefly explains that in relation to the rules pertaining to a Muslim’s 
deeds a probable (ẓannī) hadith is granted the same authority as a definite 
(qaṭʿī) hadith in order to facilitate the identification of duties imposed by 
God.53 Beyond the realm of law, certainty (yaqīn) in knowledge is essen-
tial. Therefore an isolated hadith that is probable (ẓannī), and therefore 
may be true or false, is insufficient for issues of creed (ʿaqāʾid), history 
(tārīkh), Qur’anic interpretation (tafsīr), the virtues (faḍāʾil) of promi-
nent personalities and the stories (qiṣaṣ) of the Qur’an.54 Ṭabāṭabāʾī con-
cludes that isolated hadiths do not have any rational or religious authority  
in fields beyond jurisprudence.55 
Accordingly, an isolated hadith cannot be considered authorita-
tive unless its content is somehow verified. In fact, the validity of non- 
jurisprudential hadiths is based on the text (matn). In Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s view, 
agreement between the text and the Qur’an is one of the main criteria to 
determine the validity of the hadith56 and is the basis for endorsing or 
rejecting traditions.57
Furthermore, if the content of a hadith agrees with the Qur’an, the 
weakness of its isnād is harmless, and its soundness is merely additional 
evidence of its validity. By contrast, if the content conflicts with the Qur’an, 
the soundness of its isnād is of no value, and its possible weakness, in turn, 
is just additional evidence for its rejection.58 Ṭabāṭabāʾī criticises com-
mentators, whom he does not identify by name, for giving precedence to  
the soundness of the isnād in their evaluation of hadith. These commen-
tators neglect the text (matn) of the hadith and its agreement with the  
Qur’an, and thus subordinate the Qur’an to the hadith.59 In accordance 
with this argument, Ṭabāṭabāʾī only occasionally refers to the isnāds being  
51 Ḥubbullah, Naẓariyat al-sunna, 700–702. 
52 Ḥubbullah, al-Ḥadīth al-sharīf, 2:210.
53 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 10:351, 14:205–206.
54 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 8:141, 9:211.
55 Al-Majlisī, Biḥār al-anwār, 6:336 n.2; for other Shīʿī scholars’ view on isolated hadith, see 
Ḥubbullah, al-Ḥadīth al-sharīf, 2:189–310; for this debate among other Muslim schol-
ars, see al-Sarḥānī, Ḥadīth al-āḥād, 1:67–185; and al-Ghusn, Mawqif al-mutakallimīn, 
1:163–230.
56 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 9:212, 5:265.
57 In contemporary Sunnī thought we find a similar stress on the text (matn) in the evalu-
ation of hadith; see Brown, Rethinking Tradition, 112–122.
58 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 1:293, 9:212.
59 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 9:212.
246 
SHADI NAFISI

 interrupted (mursal),60 and rarely mentions their weakness (ḍaʿf).61 Yet he 
never evaluates a hadith with its isnād and seldom, if ever, refers to the 
soundness (ṣiḥḥa) of the isnād.62 In contrast to isolated hadiths, a hadith 
with multiple chains of transmission maintains its probative force (ḥujjiya) 
for Ṭabāṭabāʾī. Although he includes in his Mīzān fewer than thirty hadiths 
deemed mutawātir,63 hadiths that he classified as well-known (mashhūr) are 
significantly greater in number. He emphasises that they are mashhūr, as 
he finds them in Shīʿī,64 Sunnī65 or both Shīʿī and Sunnī sources.66 He then 
points to other variants of the hadith.67 It seems that hadiths with numer-
ous transmitters, even when they fall short of the necessary qualification 
to be mutawātir, still have important qualifications that can lead to some 
degree of certainty, as compared to isolated hadiths. Regarding the content 
of the hadith, Ṭabāṭabāʾī occasionally mentions that it is consistent with the 
Qur’an,68 but there are many instances in which he does not clarify the reli-
ability of the hadith’s isnād or content. Though his exact position in these 
cases is not clear, it seems that generally, unless he explicitly mentions their 
defect, then he approves them. 
Due to Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s matn-oriented approach to hadith, Sunnī tradi-
tions were well integrated into his exegesis and have gained a compara-
tively prominent place. In this issue, his commentary differs from that of 
most Shīʿī scholars, who assess the reliability of a hadith by referring to the 
isnād and examining Sunnī or non-Imāmī transmitters based on Shīʿī rijāl 
works.69 In these Shīʿī biographies, non-Imāmī transmitters often fall short 
60 For contemporary Shīʿī scholars, the term mursal indicates that the chain of transmis-
sion has been interrupted and one or more transmitters is missing: al-Māmqānī, Miqbās 
al-hidāya, 1:338. In Sunnī terminology, mursal usually indicates a tradition quoting the 
Prophet but with a transmitter who never met him; that is, the Companion is missing. 
See Juynboll, ‘Mursal’, in EI2, 7:631. Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī uses the word mursal or mursalan 
128 times in his tafsīr; about half of which refer to the isnād. See al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 
2:26, 38; 3:214, 233; 4:385; 5:125.
61 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī mentions the category of weak hadith thirteen times with the term ḍaʿīf 
and ḍaʿʿafahu; of these only four are his own judgements, the others are citations of 
judgements put forward by other scholars. For examples, see al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 
5:389, 6:214, 7:148.
62 For an exception, see al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 10:328.
63 I searched for tawātur and mutawātir in the ‘hadith discussion’ section of al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, 
al-Mīzān; for some examples see: 1:183, 2:107.
64 For examples, see al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 1:23; 2:258; 7:306.
65 For examples, see al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 2:88, 189; 9:217; 15:50.
66 For examples, see al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 6:169; 14:308. 
67 As noted, these kinds of comments appear frequently in hadith discussions. A well-
known (mashhūr) hadith is one with more than two transmitters in one level (ṭabaqa); 
see Robson, ‘Ḥadīth’, in EI2, 3:25.
68 For examples, see al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 1:124, 3:163, 12:148, 20:117.
69 Al-Māmqānī, Miqbās al-hidāya, 1:168.
 
ʿALLĀMA ṬABĀṬABĀʾĪ AND EXEGETICAL HADITHS 
247

 of the required qualifications, but since Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s point of contention is 
the content of the hadith, he accepts Sunnī hadiths. 
The Teachings of the Prophet and Ahl al-Bayt in the  
Context of the Qur’an
Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s second principle is his view that the Prophet and the ahl al-
bayt are the teachers of the Qur’an. Muslim scholars generally maintain 
that the Qur’an explicitly gives authority to the statements, actions and 
tacit approvals of the Prophet, whether in the field of interpretation, creed 
or law. The verses cited as proof for this status are those introducing the 
Prophet as the one who elucidates the verses70 and teaches the Book.71 
Furthermore, he is to be obeyed in whatever he forbids or proscribes.72 In 
Ṭabāṭabāʾīʾs view, these verses identify two roles of the Prophet. One group 
of verses introduces the Prophet Muhammad as a legislator,73 according 
to which he specifies the details of the regulations that are not mentioned 
in the Book (i.e. the Qur’an).74 Thus, his sayings or deeds on some mat-
ters of Islamic law (fiqh) cannot necessarily be confirmed by the Qur’an. 
The second group of verses designates the Prophet as a teacher75 who 
explains the Qur’an so that it is properly understood. Therefore, the role of 
the Prophet and the ahl al-bayt as his spiritual successors76 is to educate, 
meaning that they facilitate clear understanding for students. Ṭabābabāʾī 
cites verses and traditions in support of his argument. The Qur’an calls  
on Muslims and infidels to contemplate the Qur’an, and accept it because 
‘[i]f it had been from other than God, surely they would have found in 
it much inconsistency’ (Q. 4:82). For Ṭabāṭabāʾī, this verse implies that 
Qur’anic teachings can be understood by contemplation and rational rea-
soning, and obtaining this understanding does not depend on the explana-
tions of the Companions, the Successors or even the Prophet and the ahl 
al-bayt. This does not mean that he prohibits one from drawing on the 
hadith or other extra sources to clarify Qur’anic verses, but for sources to 
70 Q. 16:44. For translations of Qurʼanic quotations, I used Arberry, The Koran Interpreted, 
with slight modifications.
71 Q. 2:129, 3:164, 62:1.
72 Q. 59:7; for this argument see ʿAbd al-Khāliq, Ḥujjiya al-sunna, 291–308; he refers to 
five groups of verses to prove the authenticity of the hadith. The ones mentioned are in 
the second and third group.
73 Q. 59:7.
74 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 3:84, 19:204.
75 According to the above-mentioned verses of suras al-Naḥl (16), al-Baqara (2), Āl-ʿImrān 
(3), al-Jumuʿa (62).
76 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 1:11; Ṭabāṭabāʾī, Qurʾan dar Islam, 44; this book is also avail-
able in English: The Qurʾan in Islam. For the conception of the imamate in Shīʿī Islam, 
see Sobhani, Doctrines of Shiʿi Islam, 119–137.
248 
SHADI NAFISI

 have interpretive properties for the Qur’an, they must have certain qualifi-
cations. The decisive criterion for this is their accordance with the Qur’an.
To justify his position, Ṭabābabāʾī cites hadiths that call on Muslims to 
follow the teachings of the Qur’an, and others that stress agreement with 
the Qur’an as the central criterion for evaluating the authenticity of had-
iths. Following the Qur’an and using it as a point of reference for evaluating 
hadiths can only be realised if their meanings are properly understood.77 
Ṭabātabāʾī’s view concerning the Qur’an as self-contained and not in 
need of hadith to be correctly understood resembles the perspective of 
those who claim that the Qur’an should be the sole, or at least the central 
point of reference, but in fact his view differs greatly.78 First, Ṭabātabāʾī 
clearly approves of considering hadith, including the teachings of the 
Prophet and the ahl al-bayt, in the interpretation of the Qur’an. Second, 
he devotes a significant part of his tafsīr to hadith discussion, because 
to practise this method properly, one must be fully acquainted with  
the hadiths.79
The Qur’an as the Criterion of Hadith Assessment
According to the two above-mentioned principles, consistency with the 
Qur’an is the main criterion for evaluating hadith. This point is also men-
tioned in various hadiths transmitted on the authority of Prophet Muham-
mad, and also those transmitted from five of the twelve Shīʿī Imams: the first 
Imam, ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib (d. 40/661); the fifth, Muḥammad b. ʿAlī al-Bāqir 
(d. 117/733); the sixth, Jaʿfar b. Muḥammad al-Ṣādiq (d. 148/765); the sev-
enth, Mūsā b. Jaʿfar al-Kāẓim (d. 183/799); and the ninth, Muḥammad b. 
ʿAlī al-Jawwād (d. 220/835).80 Some of these traditions mention two aspects, 
consistency with the Qur’an as a prerequisite for acceptance, and contra-
diction with the Qur’an as a reason for rejection. Among the better-known 
examples of these is one transmitted on the authority of the Prophet. It 
states that he said in a sermon in Mina: ‘Whenever a hadith is revealed to 
you on my authority, it is mine if it is in agreement with the Book and it is 
not mine if it is in opposition with the Book.’81 Although similar traditions 
have been narrated in Sunnī sources, generally they have been considered 
77 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 3:84–86. For a detailed study of his interpretive method, see 
Medoff, ‘Ijtihad and Renewal’; for a critical review, see Paya, Islam, 110–133; Ehteshami 
and Rizvi, ‘Beyond the Letter’.
78 Ilāhī Bakhsh, al-Qurʾānīyūn, 210–257.
79 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 3:87.
80 Al-Majlisī, Biḥār al-anwār, 2:225, 227, 237, 242, 244, 250; for a classification of these 
hadiths and a detailed discussion of them, see Nurūzī and Naqīzādih, ‘Mafhūm shināsī’, 
37–66; Naṣīrī, Ravishshināsī-i naqd-i aḥādīth, 344–384. 
81 Al-Majlisī, Biḥār al-anwār, 2:227; al-Ḥimyarī, Qurb al-asnād, 92.
 
ʿALLĀMA ṬABĀṬABĀʾĪ AND EXEGETICAL HADITHS 
249

 invalid.82 There is an ongoing debate in Shīʿī Islam on the interpretation of 
the first phrase as well, that is, agreement with the Qur’an. As the Qur’an 
does not address all the issues mentioned in the traditions, the criterion of 
agreement with the Qur’an may lead to the rejection of many traditions. 
Therefore, the predominant interpretation of this criterion is that both cri-
teria refer to one element, namely disagreement with the Qur’an. Thus, if a 
hadith disagrees, it should be rejected, and if it does not disagree, it should 
be accepted. According to this dominant view, every hadith does not need 
to be in agreement with the Qur’an.83 By contrast, Ṭabāṭabāʾī continued to 
emphasise a hadith’s consistency with the Qur’an as a precondition for its 
verification, as mentioned above, while sharing the dominant view that a 
hadith’s contradiction with the Qur’an is a criterion for rejection.84 This 
also implies that hadiths whose content does not relate to the Qur’an, and 
for which the criterion of agreement with the Qur’an cannot be applied, 
must be rejected – at least for disciplines beyond fiqh. 
In the cases of traditions in which the apparent meaning of a hadith 
seems to contradict the Qur’an, Ṭabātabāʾī might offer interpretations to 
resolve the problem to some extent. In the section on hadith discussion 
in his Mīzān, he often points out that a tradition might confirm the same 
meaning clarified in the explanation (bayān) through the textual analysis 
of the Qur’an,85 and at times, he refers the reader to the explanation sec-
tion for further elucidation of the hadith.86 He also might specify that an 
exegetical hadith does not qualify as authoritative if it lacks consistency. 
For example, the Qur’an verse (2:259) mentions the story of a man pass-
ing a ruined city, wondering if and how God could give life to the dead. 
God causes the man to die for one hundred years and then raises him to 
show the man His power to resurrect. In both Shīʿī and Sunnī sources,87 
traditions suggest that the man in the verse may refer to ʿUzayr or Irmīyā. 
Ṭabāṭabāʾī does not accept these traditions as the correct interpretation for 
the above-mentioned Qur’an verse because they are isolated, with weak 
isnāds, and there is no evidence supporting them from the Qur’an, or even 
from the Torah.88 His explanation for the identification of the addressee 
82 ʿAbd al-Khāliq, Ḥujjiya al-sunna, 474–475.
83 Shaykh Murtaḍā al-Anṣārī (d. 1281/1864) and Muḥammad Bāqir al-Ṣadr (d. 1400/1980) 
are two of the most eminent Shīʿī scholars to support this view. Nurūzī and Naqīzādih, 
‘Mafhūm shināsī’, 48–52; Naṣīrī, Ravishshināsī-i naqd-i aḥādīth, 368–372.
84 He does not discuss this particular hadith, but he repeatedly mentions that it is neces-
sary for the text (matn) to be consistent with the Qur’an, beyond the subject matter of 
Islamic law (fiqh).
85 See, for example, al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 7:209; 8:324; 19:269.
86 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 1:255, 306; 2:99, 378; 10:220. 
87 Al-Ṭabarī, Jāmiʿ al-bayān, 3:19–20; al-Baḥrānī, al-Burhān, 1:534.
88 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 2:378.
250 
SHADI NAFISI

 as ʿUzayr or Irmīyā is not a concrete identification of the man passing the 
ruined city. Instead, Ṭabāṭabāʾī advocates a general interpretation, that the 
man must have been pious, or probably a prophet, since he was used to 
conversing with God and receiving revelations from Him.89 
Regarding legal issues, Muslim scholars generally use hadith for the 
specification (takhṣīṣ) of general (ʿāmm) expressions90 in the Qur’an; this 
illustrates the explanatory role of the Prophet and ahl al-bayt. Ṭabātabāʾī 
accepts such hadiths for specification in the context of fiqh, but he rejects 
takhṣīṣ for exegetical hadiths. For example, the Qur’an verse (23:101) states 
that there will be no kinship on the Last Day. Nevertheless several pro-
phetic traditions assert that all kinship, by blood or marriage, will be bro-
ken on that day except those related to the Prophet.91 Ṭabāṭabāʾī rejects 
this exclusion of the Prophet’s kinship because it conflicts with the general 
meaning of the verse. He suggests that the hadith may indicate that belong-
ing to the Prophet’s family could prompt them to do good deeds for which 
his kin will benefit on the day of resurrection.92 
Ṭabāṭabāʾī applies the principle of consistency with the Qur’an to several 
themes of hadiths. Two of these are illustrated in hadiths on the occasions 
of revelation, and those hadiths that interpret certain verses as referring to 
the Imams. 
Hadiths on the Occasions of Revelation
It is generally agreed that knowledge about the occasions of revelation 
can only be obtained from traditions that were reported on the authority 
of the Companions as eyewitnesses, or on the authority of the Successors, 
who were informed by the Companions.93 The reliability of these reports 
has been the subject of debate by modern scholars.94 Ṭabāṭabāʾī is among 
those who are generally suspicious about these reports on the occasions of 
revelation. Like many Shīʿī scholars, he does not regard the Companions’ 
and Successors’ Qur’an commentary as having more impact than that of 
any exegete. Because of their contradictory reports about the occasions 
89 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 2:362–363.
90 For further explanation, see Weiss, ‘ʿUmūm wa-Khuṣūṣ’, in EI2, 10:866–867.
91 Al-Suyūṭī, al-Durr al-manthūr, 6:117.
92 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 15:75–76; for other examples, see al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 
2:259; 7:148, 396; 8:62, 231, 288; 11:239.
93 Traditions on the authority of the Successors who were informed by the Companions 
are usually called athar (pl. āthār). Sunnī scholars consider these traditions on the occa-
sions of revelation like those attributed to the Prophet; see al-Suyūṭī, Tadrīb al-rāwī, 
1:215–216. See also al-Wāḥidī, Asbāb nuzūl al-Qurʾān, 10; al-Suyūṭī, al-Itqān, 1:126.
94 For a general introduction to this genre of exegetical literature, see Rippin, ‘Occasions 
of Revelation’, EQ, 3:569–573. 
 
ʿALLĀMA ṬABĀṬABĀʾĪ AND EXEGETICAL HADITHS 
251

 of revelation, Ṭabāṭabāʾī refutes them as eyewitnesses.95 He questions the 
authenticity of the chronological list of the suras96 attributed to the famous 
Companion and early Qur’an commentator, Ibn ʿAbbās (d. 68/687), since 
according to Ṭabāṭabāʾī, he was too young97 to have been a witness for the 
revelation of many suras. Moreover, Ibn ʿAbbās’s report on the chrono-
logical order of the suras is an isolated one and therefore not authorita-
tive.98 Although Ṭabāṭabāʾī does not rule out the possibility of conscious 
forgery of the reports on the occasion of revelation, he considers most of 
these narrations to be the well-meaning interpretations of Companions, 
Successors or later commentators, whose reports were intended to rec-
oncile historical events with Qur’an verses and clarify the occasions of 
revelation.99 In order to identify reliable hadiths related to the topic of the 
occasions of revelation, he considers it important to scrutinise the content 
of these traditions.100
For instance, quoting from hadith collections, Ṭabāṭabāʾī mentions a 
variety of possible events for the occasion of revelation of Surat al-Tawba 
(Q. 9:64–74).101 These verses describe some of the features and deeds of the 
hypocrites (munāfiqūn). Among the numerous reports of the occasion of 
revelation for this group of verses, Ṭabāṭabāʾī holds that the one that men-
tions a group of hypocrites who intended to assassinate the Prophet on his 
return from the battle of Tabuk (9/630–631) as the most likely. The other 
reports mostly mention instances in which the hypocrites had mocked or 
insulted the Prophet.102 As the Qur’an mentions that ‘They [the hypocrites] 
swear by God that they said nothing, but they indeed said the word of 
unbelief and disbelieved, after they had surrendered; They planned what 
they never attained to . . .’ (Q. 9:74), Ṭabāṭabāʾī deduces that the hypocrites 
had concocted a plot, and that this conspiracy is what was meant by ‘the 
word of unbelief’ in the Qur’anic verse, not the mocking and insulting of 
the Prophet. God revealed their plot to the Prophet, and thus, according  
to the tradition, they were not able to achieve their goal.103 
 95 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 1:294.
 96 This list is the main source for the chronological order of the suras in the standard 
Egyptian version of the Qur’an; see Böwering, ‘Chronology and the Qurʾān’, in EQ, 
1:321–322.
 97 He was a boy of ten, thirteen or fifteen when the Prophet died; see Ibn Ḥajar 
al-ʿAsqalānī, al-Iṣāba, 9:122. 
 98 Ṭabāṭabāʾī, Qurʾān dar Islam, 144–145.
 99 Ṭabāṭabāʾī, Qurʾān dar Islam, 135–136. 
100 For other criteria on the evaluation of this genre of hadith, see Nafisi, ‘ʿAllāma 
Ṭabāṭabāʾī va-miʿyārhā-yi fahm’, 86–100.
101 Al-Ṭabrisī, Majmaʿ al-bayān, 5:70–71 and 78–79; al-Suyūṭī, al-Durr al-manthūr, 
3:254–261.
102 Al-Ṭabarī, Jāmiʿ al-bayān, 10:127–130; al-Ṭabrisī, Majmaʿ al-bayān, 5:78–79.
103 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 9:325, 344–345.
252 
SHADI NAFISI

 Another example is Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s view on the reports about the occasion 
of revelation of Surat al-Luqmān, which states: ‘But if they [your parents] 
strive with you to make you associate with Me that of which you have no 
knowledge, then do not obey them. Keep them company honourably in 
this world but follow the way of those who turn to Me . . .’ (Q. 31:15). Saʿd 
b. Abī Waqqāṣ (d. between 51/669 and 58/678)104 claims that this verse was 
revealed about him.105 Ṭabāṭabāʾī questions the validity of this claim and 
points out that it is a continuation of the preceding verse in which human 
beings are ordered to be kind to their parents, as part of a general com-
mand (wa-waṣṣayna al-insāna bi-wālidayhi iḥsānā) regardless of religion 
or law, with no specific occasion for it.106
Exegetical Hadiths on the Imams 
Shīʿī sources report many traditions in which different verses of the Qur’an 
were interpreted as referring to the Imams of the ahl al-bayt. These tradi-
tions are of various types: some are classified as belonging to the occasions 
of revelation, such as the tradition on Surat al-Insān (76:8). In this verse, 
the Qur’an praises those who ‘give food, for the love of Him, to the needy, 
the orphan, the captive (asīr)’.107 According to a hadith, ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib  
(d. 40/661) and his wife Fāṭima (d. 11/632) (the daughter of the Prophet) 
had prepared some food when a poor man came to their home and asked 
for provisions. They gave him one-third of their food. When an orphan, 
and then a captive came and asked for food, ʿAlī and Fāṭima gave them the 
104 He died between 51/669 and 58/678; see Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī, al-Iṣāba, 3:62; 
al-Ziriklī, al-Aʿlām, 3:87 has 55/675 as the date of death. His will has been a subject of 
debate; see Speight, ‘The Will of Saʿd b. a. Waqqāṣ’, 249–267; Powers, ‘The Will of Sa‘d 
b. Abî Waqqâṣ’, 33–53.
105 No other occasion of revelation has been mentioned for this verse; see al-Ṭabarī, Jāmiʿ 
al-bayān, 21:45; al-Suyūṭī, al-Durr al-manthūr, 5:165–166; al-Wāḥidī, Asbāb nuzūl 
al-Qurʾān, 357.
106 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 9:15; for further examples, see al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 2:99, 
163, 405, 407; 6:60, 112, 155; 10:40; 13:216; 15:105, 334; 16:241; 18:52, 317, 320; 
19:337; 20:47, 58, 157. 
107 Muslim commentators give a variety of interpretations of asīr. Al-Ṭabarī explains it as 
an infidel captured in a war against Muslims or a Muslim who has been justly impris-
oned; see al-Ṭabarī, Jāmiʿ al-bayān, 29:129. Fakhr al-Dīn al-Rāzī gives five possible 
meanings for it: a slave, a captured infidel, a debtor, a Muslim prisoner or a wife; see 
al-Rāzī, al-Tafsīr al-kabīr, 30:747–748. Ṭabāṭabāʾī considers it someone captured in a 
war against Muslims; see al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 20:126. He does not explain how a 
captive could move about freely in the town. However, it is reported on the authority 
of Ḥasan that when the Prophet took captives, he would turn them over to Muslims 
for two or three days, and advise them to be kind to the captives; see al-Zamakhsharī, 
al-Kashshāf, 4:669.
 
ʿALLĀMA ṬABĀṬABĀʾĪ AND EXEGETICAL HADITHS 
253

 rest of the food. After this event, the verse was revealed.108 Sunnī sources 
also reported this event as the occasion of revelation for the verse. Some 
scholars accepted this hadith as the correct interpretation of the verse, 
while others challenged it.109 
The second type of tradition refers to those hadiths in which ʿAlī and the 
other Imams are the intended meaning of a Qur’anic verse, or parts of the 
verse. An example is the expression ahl al-dhikr (the people of remember-
ance; Q. 16:43 and 21:7), which is interpreted as referring to the Imams.110 
Traditions of this type, which are numerous, are rejected by Sunnī schol-
ars and considered evidence of the Shīʿa imposing sectarian views on the 
Qur’an.111 Shīʿī commentators generally quote these traditions, but do not 
explain their relation to the Qur’an. Most of these traditions were consid-
ered esoteric interpretations of the verses, part of the knowledge that was 
given to the ahl al-bayt.112 According to some Shīʿī hadiths such interpreta-
tions of the Qur’an are beyond the understanding of the human intellect,113 
and Shīʿī commentators consider their explanation unnecessary. 
Unlike most of his predecessors, Ṭabāṭabāʾī offers an explanation for 
this second type of hadith because he believes, according to his second 
principle, that exegetical ḥadīths must agree with the Qur’an. In order to 
understand his line of argumentation, it is necessary to consider the terms 
he uses to differentiate between two basic types of exegetical hadith. The 
first type of exegetical hadith is called tafsīr114 (interpretation), and the sec-
ond type is called taṭbīq (adaptation) and/or jary (flowing [movement]). 
By tafsīr, he means the exoteric explanation of a verse that can be reached 
by observing its literal and historical context. The occasions of revelation 
are also considered a tafsīr since they clarify the specific occasion to which 
the verse refers historically. Therefore, ʿAlī and his wife are considered 
the tafsīr for Qur’an 76:8. By jary and taṭbīq, he means those hadiths that 
explain a Qur’anic verse in a figurative sense. The two distinct concepts of 
108 Al-Qummī, Tafsῑr al-Qummī, 2:398–399; this event has been reported in various 
sources but they differ in details; see al-Majlisī, Biḥār al-anwār, 35:237–255. 
109 Al-Wāḥidī, Asbāb nuzūl al-Qurʾān, 470; al-Suyūṭī, al-Durr al-manthūr, 8:371; and see 
al-Qurṭubī, al-Jāmiʿ, 19:131–135, where he discusses this case in detail.
110 This hadith is very well known among the Shīʿa and is widely cited. See al-Qummī, 
Tafsῑr al-Qummī, 2:68; al-Baḥrānī, al-Burhān, 3:423; al-Majlisī, Biḥār al-anwār, 
23:179, 180, 183, 184.
111 Al-Dhahabī, al-Tafsīr, 2:87–96, 138, 139.
112 Al-Kāshānī, Tafsῑr al-ṣāfī, 1:26; Sayyidān, Tafsīr, 1:16. For a discussion of the esoteric 
interpretation of Ṭabāṭabāʾī, see Ehteshami and Rizvi, ‘Beyond the Letter’; I do not 
address Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s view on the esoteric (bāṭin) interpretation of Qur’an verses in this 
chapter.
113 Al-Baḥrānī, al-Burhān, 1:3–6.
114 For another category of tafsīr/taṭbīq in which, according to Ṭabāṭabāʾī, taṭbīq is  
considered unsuitable, see Ehteshami and Rizvi, ‘Beyond the Letter’, 453.
254 
SHADI NAFISI

 tafsīr and taṭbīq should not be understood as mutually exclusive; instead, 
in Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s thought, they are regarded as complementary. For instance, 
any believer who helps the needy for the sake of God is an example of 
Qur’an 76:8, although this does not accord with the historical context of 
the verse (which is based on the first decade after the hijra), nor does it 
reflect the literal wording (namely giving to a needy person, an orphan or 
a captive). Ṭabāṭabāʾī borrows the term jary from a simile employed by the 
fifth Shīʿī Imam, Muḥammad b. ʿAlī al-Bāqir (d. 117/733), and the sixth 
Imam, Jaʿfar b. Muḥammad al-Ṣādiq (d. 148/765). These two Imams com-
pare these adaptations of Qur’anic verses to the sun and moon pursuing 
their course (kamā yajrī al-shams wa-l-qamar).115 Thus, such new explana-
tions of Qur’anic verses are considered a sign of the continuous presence 
of the Qur’an, something that is, in turn, illustrated by the simile of the sun 
and the moon. 
How can these two types of hadith (tafsīr and taṭbīq/jary) be identi-
fied?116 According to Ṭabāṭabāʾī, a hadith is only accepted as tafsīr of a verse 
if it is in accordance with the literal meaning and historical context of the 
verse. By contrast, when several hadiths identify Imams or various person-
alities as the intended interpretation of the same verse, it shows that this is 
not tafsīr, but taṭbīq; in this case, they are considered new examples of the 
ongoing rereading of the Qur’an.117 
For example, Ṭabāṭabāʾī refutes hadiths that interpret the term ahl al-
dhikr (the people of remembrance) as referring to the Imams. The word dhikr  
(lit., remembrance) is used in the Qur’an to refer to divine books, including 
the Qur’an and the Torah.118 The term ahl al-dhikr occurs twice in the Qur’an. 
In both verses, it invites the people to ask ahl al-dhikr about the previous 
men to whom God sent revelations.119 According to Ṭabāṭabāʾī, these verses 
refer to Christian and Jewish scholars who were considered knowledgeable; 
thus, the tafsīr of this term is the people of the book (ahl al-kitāb).120 If the 
people at the time of the revelation were advised to ask Christian and Jewish 
115 Al-ʿAyyāshī, al-Tafsīr, 1:11, hadith nos. 4 and 5; al-Ṣaffār, Baṣāʾir al-darajāt, 1:196, had-
ith 7; al-Kulaynī, al-Kāfī, 1:191, 192.
116 Some hadiths explicitly distinguish between these two types of interpretation, but 
this is very rare. One of the few instances is a hadith transmitted on the authority of 
Imam al-Bāqir about Q. 22:40, saying that the verse was revealed about the Prophet, 
ʿAlī, Ḥamza and Jaʿfar, but was applied to Ḥusayn (nazalat fī . . . wa-jarat fi . . .); see 
al-Kulaynī, al-Kāfī, 8:337–338. 
117 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 1:41. 
118 Lane, Arabic-English Lexicon, 1:968–969. 
119 Q. 16:43 and 21:7; there is a very slight difference in the wording of the two verses, and 
Arberry’s translation also differs slightly. The translation given here is the one for sura 
21:7: ‘And We sent none before you, but men to whom We made revelation; question 
the people of the Remembrance, if you do not know.’
120 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 14:254.
 
ʿALLĀMA ṬABĀṬABĀʾĪ AND EXEGETICAL HADITHS 
255

 scholars, this was because of their knowledge. After the revelation, the last 
part of the verse, ‘question the people of the remembrance, if you do not 
know’, also implies a general rule; in this case, the Imams could become the 
interpretation of the knowledgeable. 
Traditions associated with Qur’an 17:4–5 about the Israelites are 
another example of this line of argumentation: 
And We decreed for the Children of Israel in the Book: You shall 
cause corruption in the earth twice, and you shall ascend exceed-
ingly high [in corruption]. So, when the promise of the first of these 
came to pass, We sent against you servants of Ours, men of great 
might, and they went through the habitations and it was a promise 
fulfilled. (Q. 17:4–5)
Some Shīʿī hadiths state that the two corruptions mentioned in the verse 
refer to the assassination of ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib (d. 40/661) and the murder of 
Imam Ḥasan b. ʿAlī (d. 50/670). The expression ‘ascending high’ is said to 
refer to the martyrdom of Imam Ḥusayn b. ʿAlī (d. 61/680). And the ‘men 
of the great might’ are interpreted as a group of followers of the Imams 
who rise up before the coming of the last Imam, and take revenge for the 
martyred Imams.121 For Ṭabāṭabāʾī, these are just events in the history of 
Islam in which Muslims committed corrupt acts (in this case the murders 
of Imams ʿAlī and Ḥasan), just as the Israelites did, but they are not the tafsīr 
of the verse; they are the jary and taṭbīq of this verse.122 Muslims are said 
to have followed the Israelites, as mentioned in a prophetic hadith quoted 
by both the Shīʿī and Sunnī sources: the Prophet predicted that Muslims 
would follow the Children of Israel (Banū Isrāʾīl) in all their deeds, and this 
adherence would be so slavish that if they entered a lizard’s nest, Muslims 
would do the same.123 Thus, the murders of the two Imams are examples of 
such corrupt acts.124 
Ṭabāṭabāʾī uses his division of tafsīr and taṭbīq/jary for other themes of 
hadiths beyond those that refer to the ahl al-bayt.125 According to a tradition, 
the believers praised in the Qur’an (‘But those who believe, and do deeds of 
righteousness, the gardens of paradise shall be their hospitality’ [18:107]) 
121 Al-Baḥrānī, al-Burhān, 3:502. 
122 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 4:256–257.
123 This is a prophetic hadith that has been narrated with different wordings and in a vari-
ety of sources. See al-Hilāli, Kitāb Sulaym, 2:599 (the last part of a very long tradition); 
al-ʿAyyāshī, al-Tafsīr, 1:303; al-Bukhārī, Ṣaḥīḥ, 1808, hadith no. 7320; Muslim, Ṣaḥīḥ 
Muslim, 1230–1231, hadith no. 2669. 
124 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 13:44. 
125 See al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 17:252 for the followers of Imams; see 17:394 for Iblīs and 
Cain; see 5:94 for loans; and see 1:153 for fasting. 
256 
SHADI NAFISI

 are Abū Dharr, Salmān, Miqdād, and ʿAmmār.126 But since this verse is from 
the Meccan period, and Salmān converted to Islam in Medina, the tradition 
cannot correspond to the historical context of the verse. Emphasising the 
apparent meaning of the verse, Ṭabāṭabāʾī says that it honours the righteous 
in general, and does not imply specific people; consequently, he considers 
the above-mentioned four people as examples of the numerous people who 
may be intended by the verse, and thus, this hadith is its taṭbīq, and not its 
tafsīr.127 
Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s explanation of Shīʿī hadith on ahl al-bayt is considered  
of great significance and is discussed separately.128 For the contemporary 
Shīʿī community, which tends toward a rational justification of Islamic 
teachings, including the interpretation of hadiths, Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s understand-
ing of these hadiths is important because he explicates the variant had-
iths on a given verse and resolves their conflict with the apparent meaning  
of the Qurʼan. 
Conclusion
As a contemporary commentator of Shīʿī hadith, Ṭabāṭabāʾī developed 
specific lines of thought that stirred great interest and were echoed 
among scholars. His uncommon standpoint regarding isolated hadiths 
as beyond the field of law, and his justification of interpretive hadiths 
of the Prophet and ahl al-bayt, made matn the focus of his evaluation 
of hadiths. Among the many different criteria of content evaluation, he 
emphasises the consistency of the hadith with the Qur’an as the most 
essential principle. A hadith can have exegetical authority if it agrees 
with the apparent meaning of the verse(s) of the Qur’an, even though its 
transmission might be weak. On the other hand, he refutes hadiths that 
fall short of the qualification of agreement, even though it might have a 
sound isnād. 
In order to comprehend and justify the variety of hadiths that he uses 
to interpret verses of the Qur’an in somewhat divergent ways, Ṭabāṭabāʾī 
introduces a classification of types of hadiths (I have not addressed all of 
them in this chapter). That is, tafsīr hadiths refer only to the concrete, 
documented historical context at the time of the revelation, and must 
accord with the literal wording of the verse. The other type, taṭbīq or jary, 
126 Al-Qummī, Tafsῑr al-Qummī, 2:46.
127 Al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, al-Mīzān, 13:402; for further discussion on its underlying principles, 
see Nafisi, ‘Mabānī jary va taṭbīq’.
128 Many articles in Persian and Arabic discuss the issue of jary. The following are just a 
few: Daqīq, ‘Naẓarīya al-jary’; Yazdān-panāh, ‘Jary va taṭbīq’; Muʾmin-nizhād and Rād, 
‘Mabānī adabī’.
 
ʿALLĀMA ṬABĀṬABĀʾĪ AND EXEGETICAL HADITHS 
257

 encompasses the numerous traditions that do not fulfil these qualifica-
tions; they offer new applications and partly diverging interpretations of 
the assumed intended meaning. Ṭabāṭabāʾī does not dismiss these; on 
the contrary, such traditions reflect the ongoing presence of the Qur’an 
through the centuries, and its applicability to contemporary needs. 
The example of the commentary on hadith in Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s tafsīr 
al-Mizān might serve as one illustration of the fluid boundaries of the 
genre. If we consider Qur’anic exegesis and hadith commentary as two dis-
tinct genres, the following issues might be addressed. Often, the study of 
hadith in tafsīr has been conducted by specialists of tafsīr whose analytical 
focus was directed toward Qur’anic exegesis, with little consideration of 
hadith commentary as a genre unto itself. To contextualise hadith as part 
of tafsīr in the analytical framework of hadith commentary would involve 
a closer examination and consideration of the hadith commentary tradi-
tion, something some tafsīr experts might prefer to avoid. Future research 
should at least identify the differences between these two exegetical tra-
ditions, and examine how hadith commentary operates in tafsīr and how 
Qur’anic exegesis might be operating in hadith commentary, taking into 
consideration the relative amount of material, intertextuality, argumenta-
tive strategies, as they connect to the respective tradition.
Bibliography
ʿAbd al-Khāliq, ʿA. Ḥujjiya al-sunna. Cairo: Dār al-Saʿdāwī, n.d.
ʻĀbidī, A. ‘Nigāhī bi taʿlīqāt-i ʿAllāma Ṭabāṭabāʾī bar biḥār al-anwār.’ In Marzbān 
vaḥy va khirad, edited by Daftar-i Tablīghāt-i Islāmī, pp. 669–685. Qum: 
Būstān-i Kitāb, 2002.
al-ʿAk, Kh. Uṣūl al-tafsīr wa-qawāʿiduhū. Beirut: Dār al-Nafāʾis, 1986.
Algar, H. ‘ʿAllāma Sayyid Muḥammad Ḥusayn Ṭabāṭabāʾī: Philosopher, Exegete 
and Gnostic.’ Journal of Islamic Studies 17, no. 3 (September 2006): 326–351.
al-ʿĀmilī, Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan b. al-Shahīd al-Thānī. Istiqṣāʾ al-iʿtibār fī sharḥ 
al-istibṣār. Qum: Muʾassassat Āl al-Bayt, 1998.
Amir-Moezzi, M. and H. Ansari. ‘Perfecting a Religion: Remarks on al-Kulaynī and 
His Summa of Traditions.’ In Amir-Moezzi Mohammad (ed.), Eric Ormsby 
(trans.), The Silent Qur’an and the Speaking Qur’an: Scriptural Sources of Islam 
Between History and Fervor, pp. 125–160. New York: Columbia University 
Press, 2016. 
Arberry, A. J. The Koran Interpreted. New York: Touchstone, 1996. 
Awsī, ʿA. Ravish ʿAllāmah Ṭabāṭabāʾī dar tafsīr al-mizān. Translated by Ḥ. Mīr 
Jalīlī. Tehran: Sāzmān Tablighāt Islāmī, 2002. 
al-ʿAyyāshī, M. al-Tafsīr. Edited by H. Rasūlī. 2 vols. Tehran: Maktabat al-ʿIlmiyyat 
al-Islāmiyya, 1960.
al-Baḥrānī, H. al-Burhān fī tafsῑr al-Qurʾān. 5 vols. Qum: Muʾassassat al-Baʿtha, 
1994.
258 
SHADI NAFISI

 Berg, H. The Development of Exegesis in Early Islam. London: Routledge Curzon, 
2000.
Blecher, J. ‘Ḥadīth Commentary’, in EI3. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1163/1573-3912_
ei3_COM_32080>, accessed 6 February 2021.
Blecher, J. Said the Prophet of God. Oakland: University of California Press, 2018.
Böwering, G. ‘Chronology and the Qurʾān’, in EQ, 1:316–335.
Brown, D. Rethinking Tradition in Modern Islamic Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1996.
al-Bukhārī, M. Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī. Damascus and Beirut: Dār Ibn Kathīr, 2002. 
Daqīq, M. ‘Naẓarīya al-jary wa-l-taṭbīq ʿalā ḍawʾ tafsīr al-Mīzān: al-mafhūm  
wa-l-thamarāt.’ al-Minhāj 64 (2011): 301–323.
al-Dhahabī, M. Ḥ. al-Isrāʾīlīyyāt fī al-tafsīr wa-l-ḥadīth. Cairo: Maktaba al-Wahba, 
1990.
al-Dhahabī, M. Ḥ. al-Tafsīr wa-l-mufassirūn. 2 vols. Cairo: N.p., 1976.
Ehteshami, A. and S. Rizvi. ‘Beyond the Letter: Explanation (tafsīr) versus Adaption 
(taṭbīq) in Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s al-Mīzān.’ In A. Keller and S. Rizvi (eds), The Spirit and 
the Letter: Approaches to the Esoteric Interpretation of the Qurʾan, pp. 443–473. 
London: Oxford University Press in association with the Institute of Ismaili 
Studies, 2016.
Geoffroy, E. ‘al-Suyuti’, in EI2, 9:913–916.
al-Ghusn, S. Mawqif al-mutukalimīn min al-istidlāl bi-nuṣūṣ al-kitāb wa-l-sunna. 
2 vols. Riyadh: Dār al-ʿĀṣim, 1996.
Gleave, R. ‘Between Ḥadīth and Fiqh: the ‘Canonical’ Imāmī Collections of 
Akhbār.’ Islamic Law and Society 8, no. 3 (2001): 350–382.
al-Hilālī, Sulaym b. al-Qays. Kitāb Sulaym b. al-Qays al-Hilālī. Edited by M. Anṣārī 
Zanjānī. Qum: al-Hādī, 1984.
al-Ḥimyarī, ʿA. Qurb al-asnād. Qum: Muʾassasat Āl al-Bayt li-Iḥyāʾ al-Turāth, 1992.
Howard, I. K. A. ‘Ahl-e bayt’, in EIr, I/6: 635.
Ḥubbullah, H. al-Ḥadīth al-sharīf. Beirut: al-Intishār al-ʿArabī, 2017.
Ḥubbullah, Ḥ. Naẓariyat al-sunna fī al-fikr al-imāmī al-shiʿī. Beirut: al-Intishār 
al-ʿArabī, 2006.
Ḥusaynī Ṭihrānī, M. Ḥ. Mihr-i tābān. Qum: Bāqir al-ʿUlūm, 1982.
Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī, A. al-Iṣāba fī tamyīz al-ṣaḥāba. Edited by ʿA. A. ʿAbd 
al-Mawjūd and ʿA. M. Muʿawwaḍ. 8 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyya, 1995.
Ibn Taymiyya. Muqaddama fī uṣūl al-tafsīr. Edited by ʿAdnān Zarzūr. Kuwait: Dār 
al-Qurʾān al-Karīm, 1972.
Ilāhī Bakhsh, Kh. Ḥ. al-Qurʾānīyūn wa-shubahatuhum ḥawl al-sunna. Taif:  
Maktaba al-Ṣidīq, 1989.
ʿItr, Nūr al-Dīn. Manhaj al-naqd fi-ʿulūm al-ḥadīth. Beirut Dār al-Fikr al-Muʿāṣira 
and Damascus: Dār al-Fikr, 1992.
Juyboll, G. H. A. ‘Khabar al-wāḥid’, in EI2, 4:896.
Juynboll, G. H. A. ‘Mursal’, in EI2, 7:631.
Juynboll, G. H. A. ‘Tawātur’, in EI2, 10:381–382.
Kamaly, H. God and Man in Tehran. New York: Columbia University Press, 2010.
al-Kāshānī = M. al-Fayḍ al-Kāshānī. Tafsῑr al-ṣāfī. Edited by Ḥ. Aʿlamī. 5 vols.  
Tehran: Maktabat al-Ṣadr, 1994.
 
ʿALLĀMA ṬABĀṬABĀʾĪ AND EXEGETICAL HADITHS 
259

 al-Kulaynī, M. al-Kāfī. Edited by ʿA. A. Ghaffarī and M. Ᾱkhūndī. 8 vols. Tehran: 
Dār al-Kutub al-Islāmiyya, 1986.
Lane, E. W. Arabic-English Lexicon. 8 vols. New York: Frederick Ungar Publishing, 
1956. 
Maʿārif, M. ‘Ḥadīth, jāygāh va kārkard-i ān dar tafsīr al-Mīzān.’ Pajūhish dīnī 11 
(2005): 47–64.
al-Majlisī, M. B. Biḥār al-anwār al-jāmiʿat li-durar akhbār al-aʾimmat al-aṭhār. 110 
vols. Beirut: Dār Iḥyāʾ al-Turāth al-ʿArabī, 1982.
al-Majlisī, Muḥammad Taqī. Rawḍa al-muttaqīn fī sharḥ man lā yahḍarahū 
al-faqīh. Edited by S. Ḥ. Mūsavī Kirmānī and ʿA. P. Ishtihārdī. 12 vols. Qum: 
Bunyād Farhang Islāmī Kushānpūr, 1985.
al-Māmqānī, ʿA. Miqbās al-hidāya fi ʿilm al-dirāya. Qum: Muʾassassat Āl al-Bayt 
li-Iḥyāʾ al-Turāth, 1990.
Medoff, L. ‘Ijtihad and Renewal in Qur’anic Hermeneutics: An Analysis of 
Muḥammad Ḥusayn Ṭabāṭabāʾī’s al-Mīzān fī tafsīr al-Qurʾān.’ PhD dissertation, 
University of California–Berkeley, 2007.
Medoff, L. ‘Ṭabāṭabāʾi, Moḥammad-Ḥosayn’, in EIr. <http://www.iranicaonline.
org/articles/tabatabai-mohammad-hosayn>, accessed 1 July 2020.
Mīrī, S. S. ‘Darāmadī bar maktab-I ḥadīthī-yi ʿAllāma Ṭabāṭabāʾī dar tafsīr.’ MA 
dissertation, Uṣūl al-Dīn Institute of Higher Education, Qum, 1999. 
Muʾmin-nizhād, A. and ʿA. Rād. ‘Mabānī adabī va zabān sināsī-yi jary va taṭbīq dar 
tafsīr Qurʾān.’ Taḥqīqāt-i ʿulūm-i Qurʾān va ḥadīth 33 (2017): 57–79.
al-Murtaḍā, Sharīf. Amālī al-Murtaḍā: Ghurar al-fawāʾid wa-durar al-qalāʾid. 
Edited by M. A. Ibrāhīm. 2 vols. Cairo: Dār al-Fikr al-ʿArabī, 1998.
Muslim b. al-Ḥajjāj al-Qushayrī al-Nīsābūrī. Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim. Edited by N. M. 
al-Fāryābī. Riyadh: Dār Ṭayyiba, 2006.
Nafisi, Sh. ʿAllāma Ṭabāṭabāʾī va ḥadīth. Tehran: Shirkat Intishārāt ʿIlmī va 
Farhangī, 2010.
Nafisi, Sh. ‘ʿAllāmah Ṭabāṭabāʾī va miʿyārhā-yi fahm va naqd aḥādith-i asbāb 
nuzūl.’ Amūzihā-yi Qurʾānī 4–5 (2002): 69–100.
Nafisi, Sh. ‘Mabānī jary va taṭbīq az didgāh-i ʿAllāma Ṭabāṭabāʾī.’ Qurʾān Shinākht 
12 (2014): 5–26.
Najāshī, A. Rijāl al-Najāshī. Qum: Muʾassassat al-Nashr al-Islāmī al-Tābiʿa 
li-Jāmiʿa al-Mudarrisīn, 1986. 
Nāṣih, ʿA. A. ‘Pajūhishī dar iʿtibār-i rivāyāt tafsīrī.’ Pajūhishnāmah Qurʾān va 
Hadīth 1 (2006): 49–63. 
Naṣīrī, ʿA. Ravishshināsī-i naqd-i aḥādīth. Qum: Vahy va Khirad, 2011.
Naṣīrī ʿA. and M. Ḥ. Naṣīrī. ‘Dīdgāh-hāyi ḥadīthī-i ʿAllāma Ṭabāṭabāʾī dar tafsīr 
al-Mīzān.’ Dānishnāma ʿulūm al-Qurʾān va ḥadīth 1 (2014): 109–122.
Nurūzī, M. and Ḥ. Naqīzādih. ‘Mafhūm shināsī mukhālifat va muvāfiqat-i ḥadīth 
ba Qurʾān.’ ʿUlūm Ḥadīth 55 (2010): 37–66.
Paya, A. Islam, Modernity and a New Millennium. London: Routledge, Taylor and 
Francis, 2018.
Powers, D. S. ‘The Will of Sa‘d b. Abî Waqqâṣ: A Reassessment.’ Studia Islamica 58 
(1983): 33–53. doi: <https://doi.org/10.2307/1595341>
Qāḍīzādi, K. and M. al-Jaʿfarī. ‘Ḥujjiyya al-ḥadīth fī tafsīr al-Qurʾān: Dirāsa fī 
naẓariyya al-ʿAllāma al- Ṭabāṭabāʾī.’ Nuṣūṣ muʿāṣira 30–31 (2013): 375–394.
260 
SHADI NAFISI

 al-Qummī, ʿA. Tafsῑr al-Qummī. Edited by Ṭ. Jazāyirī. 2 vols. Qum: Dār al-Kitāb, 1984.
al-Qurṭubī, M. al-Jāmiʿ li-aḥkām al-Qurʾān. Edited by H. Samīr al-Bukhārī. 20 vols. 
Riyadh: Dār al-ʿĀlam al-Kutub, 2002.
al-Rāzī, Fakhr al-Dīn M. al-Tafsīr al-kabīr. 32 vols. Beirut: Dār Iḥyāʾ al-Turāth 
al-ʿArabī, 1999.
Rippin, A. ‘Occasions of Revelation’, in EQ, 3:569–573.
Rizvi, ‘Mollā Ṣadrā Širāzi’, in eIr. <http://www.iranicaonline.org/articles/molla-
sadra-sirazi>, accessed 1 August 2020. 
Robson, J. ‘Ḥadīth’, in EI2, 3:23–28.
al-Ṣaffār, M. Ḥ. Baṣāʾir al-darajāt fi faḍāʾil Āl Muḥammad (SA). Edited by M. Kuchi 
Bāghī. Qum: Maktabat Āyatullāh Marʿashī Najafī, 1983.
al-Sarḥānī, ʿA. Ḥadīth al-āḥād wa-ḥujjīyatuhū fī taʾṣīl al-iʿtiqād. Riyadh: Maktabat 
al-Rushd, 2006.
Sayyid ʿAlavī, S. I. ‘Mitud-i naqd va taḥqīq-i ḥadīth az naẓar-i ʿAllāma Ṭabāṭabāʾī.’ 
Kiyhān Andīshi 38 (1991): 12–30.
Sayyidān, S. J. Tafsīr āyāt al-ʿaqāʾid. Mashad: Vilāyat, 2013.
Schacht J. ‘Ahl al-Ḥadīth’, in EI2, 1:258–259.
Sobhani, J. Doctrines of Shiʿi Islam: A Compendium of Imami Beliefs and Practices. 
Translated and edited by Reza Shah-Kazemi. London: I. B. Tauris, 2001.
Speight, M. ‘The Function of Hadith as Commentary on the Qurʼan.’ In A. Rippin 
(ed.), Approaches to the History of the Interpretation of the Qurʼān, pp. 63–82. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1988.
Speight, R. Marston. ‘The Will of Saʿd b. a. Waqqāṣ: The Growth of a Tradition.’ 
Der Islam 50, no. 2 (1973): 249–267.
al-Suyūṭī, ʿA. al-Durr al-manthūr fī al-tafsīr bi-l-maʾthūr. 6 vols. Beirut: Dār  
al-Fikr, 2000.
al-Suyūṭī, ʿA. al-Itqān fī ʿulūm Qurʾān. Edited by F. A. Zumarlī. 2 vols. Beirut: Dār 
al-Kitāb al-ʿArabī, 2002. 
al-Suyūṭī, ʿA. Tadrīb al-rāwī fī sharḥ taqrīb al-Nawāwī. Edited by N. M. al-Fāryābī. 
2 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Kalim al-Ṭayyib, 1996.
al-Ṭabarī, M. Jāmiʿ al-bayān fī tafsīr al-Qurʾān. 30 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Maʿrifa,  
1994. 
al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, M. Ḥ. al-Mīzān fī tafsīr al-Qurʾān. 20 vols. Beirut: Muʾassasat 
al-Aʿlamī li-l-Maṭbuʿāt, 1970. 
Ṭabāṭabāʾī, M. Ḥ. Shiʿite Islam. Translated and edited by S. H. Nasr. New York: 
State University of New York Press, 1975.
Ṭabāṭabāʾī, M. Ḥ. Qurʾan dar Islam. Qum: Daftar Intishārāt Islāmī, 2000. 
al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, M. Ḥ. al-Bayān fī muwāfiqat bayn al-ḥadīth wa-l-Qurʾān. Edited by 
A. Irādatī. Beirut: Dār al-Taʿarruf, 2006.
al-Ṭabrisī, F. Majmaʿ al-bayān fī tafsīr al-Qurʾān. Edited by F. Yazdī Ṭabāṭabāʾī and 
H. Rasūlī. 10 vols. Tehran: Nāṣir Khusru, 1993.
al-Ṭūsī, M. al-Istibṣār fi ma ikhtalafa min al-aḥkām. Edited by Ḥ. Khirsān. Tehran: 
Dār al-Kutub al-Islāmiyya, 1970.
al-Ṭūsī, M. Tahdhīb al-aḥkām. Edited by Ḥ. Khirsān. Tehran: Dār al-Kutub 
al-Islāmiyya, 1986.
al-Ṭūsī, M. al-Tibyān fī tafsīr al-Qurʾān. Edited by A. Ḥ. al-ʿĀmilī, Qum: Muʾassassat 
Āl al-Bayt li-Iḥyāʾ al-Turāth, 1992.
 
ʿALLĀMA ṬABĀṬABĀʾĪ AND EXEGETICAL HADITHS 
261

 al-Wāḥidī, ʿA. Asbāb nuzūl al-Qurʾān. Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyya, 1990.
Weiss, B. G. ‘ʿUmūm wa-Khuṣūṣ’, in EI2, 10:866–867.
Wensinck, A. J. and W. F. Heinrichs. ‘Mutawātir’, in EI2, 7:781–782.
Yazdān-panāh, S. Y. ‘Jary va taṭbīq, ravish-hā va mabānī-yi ān.’ Anvar-i maʿrifat 4 
(2012): 7–32.
Zāriʿī, ʿA. ‘Barrisī mabānī ʿAllāma Ṭabāṭabāʾī pīrāmūn bahrigīrī az rivāyāt dar tafsīr 
al-Mīzān.’ Pajūhish-hāyi Nahj al-balāgha 49 (2016): 135–151.
al-Zamakhsharī, M. al-Kashshāf ʿan ḥaqāʾiq ghawāmiḍ al-tanzīl wa-ʿuyū al-aqāwīl 
fī wujūh al-taʾwīl. Edited by ʿA. al-Mahdī. 4 vols. Beirut: Dār Iḥyāʾ al-Turāth 
al-ʿArabī, 2001. 
al-Ziriklī, Khayr al-Dīn. al-Aʿlām. 8 vols. Beirut: Dar al-ʿIlm li-l-Malāyīn, 2002.
262 
SHADI NAFISI

 CHAPTER 10
Studying Hadith Commentaries  
in the Digital Age
Maroussia Bednarkiewicz, Aslisho Qurboniev  
and Gowaart Van Den Bossche*
‘[Hadith] is the most eminent of sciences’ (min mukhtārāt al-ʿulūm ʿaynhā), 
writes Badr al-Dīn al-ʿAynī (d. 855/1451) in the introduction to ʿUmdat 
al-qārī, his voluminous commentary on al-Bukhārī’s (d. 256/870) Ṣaḥīḥ. 
His remark is part of a long rhetorical acclamation of prophetic traditions; 
it expresses the idea that hadith and its auxiliary disciplines occupied a cen-
tral position in the Islamic oral and written tradition. This centrality has 
continued in the digital age, and various apps, forums and video channels 
devoted to the teaching and commentary of hadith have appeared. Many 
classical hadith texts are now also available in digital editions in online 
libraries such as Shamela or ShiaOnlineLibrary (al-Maktaba al-Shīʿiyya). 
The digitised texts from these collections can be used for traditional close 
reading but also for computational analysis. The advent of such online 
libraries facilitates the navigation and extraction of text to build corpora 
tailored to new research questions, thus radically changing historians’ 
workflow. Yet there are still significant obstacles to the digital availability of 
hadith literature and these obstacles inhibit the building of large corpora 
for computational analysis.
In this essay we reflect on the challenges involved in corpus building for 
hadith studies as well as the advances already made. We specifically focus 
on the Open Islamicate Texts Initiative (OpenITI), a large, academically 
curated corpus of Arabic texts sourced from various online libraries. This 
corpus is continuously vetted and expanded by scholarly contributions.  
 * The authors have received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under 
the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agree-
ment no. 772989) and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft under Germany’s Excel-
lence Strategy (EXC number 2064/1 – Project number 390727645). They would like 
to thank members of the KITAB team, Stefanie Brinkmann, Ramon Harvey and the 
anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments on earlier iterations of this essay.

 264 
BEDNARKIEWICZ, QURBONIEV AND VAN DEN BOSSCHE
We discuss its advantages for computational macro-analysis and for more 
traditional close reading, and survey recent research in digital hadith stud-
ies. As an example of the possibilities of computational macro-analysis,  
we focus on assessing the output of the software ‘passim’, which has identi-
fied millions of instances of text reuse – places where texts share materi-
als with one another – across the OpenITI corpus by employing a set of 
algorithms to detect and align similar passages of text.1 These instances of 
reuse may be the result of citation, plagiarism, use of common sources and 
many other forms of intertextuality. Text reuse is used in this chapter as a 
broad analytical category that may account for all these forms. In the final 
part of this essay we present examples of this text reuse data, specifically as 
it applies to the study of hadith commentaries.
Corpus Building
Despite the advantages of working with digital libraries (accessibility, 
full-text search, the possibility of computational analysis), few research-
ers would give online collections serious credit as research tools in their 
own right. After locating the information in a digitised text, they often 
crosscheck with the published physical editions on which it is based, and 
only cite the latter in their critical apparatus. In short, researchers’ work-
flows have arguably changed in the digital age, but their general attitude 
toward digital corpora often remains one of adamant mistrust, mitigated 
by using long established historical-critical methods. To be sure, this is 
often a healthy attitude considering the number of mistakes in digital texts, 
the absence of critical apparatus and the inconsistent editorial methods 
employed in generating them, but these deficiencies do not discredit the 
efforts of those developing digital corpora and methods. Rather, the aim 
should be to strive for a representative premodern corpus that can be reli-
able and used for many different ends, both traditional and computational, 
complementary to manuscripts and printed editions. 
There is no single definition of a corpus, as research questions call 
for various types of corpora, and the norms that exist in fields differ. 
While small corpora essentially support more traditional micro-analyti-
cal approaches, the progress in computational text analysis increasingly 
encourages scholars to take into consideration macro-analytical research 
questions on larger datasets.2 As we see below, the OpenITI corpus belongs 
to the generation of large digital corpora inspired by historical linguistics 
that aims to represent historical textual culture.
 1 See the discussion below and the description online at <https://github.com/dasmiq/
passim> (accessed October 2022). For an application of these algorithms to another 
textual corpus, see Cordell and Smith, Viral Texts.
 2 Jockers, Macroanalysis, 17–18. 

  
IN THE DIGITAL AGE 
265
Large digital corpora, like OpenITI, can be used for various kinds of com-
putational analyses. Automated text analysis often renders traditional analy-
ses more efficient and enables users to ask new research questions that were 
impossible to imagine before we had the computational power to process 
large datasets. Indeed, individual researchers, no matter how well read they 
are, can only approach the texts in a pixel-like way. They search pars pro 
toto, for the whole is usually far too large to be studied in any detail by a sin-
gle scholar. By contrast, algorithms perform best with large text collections. 
In this regard, hadith commentaries are an ideal corpus for computational 
approaches, as they are for historians. As Joel Blecher has shown in his study 
of commentaries of Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī through the ages, these texts represent 
a great but understudied source of information for historians interested in  
Muslim societies, religious practices, law, cultures and traditions.3 Further-
more, they are a living practice; Muslims have continuously transmitted, 
compiled and commented on hadith.4 Despite the preponderance of hadith 
literature in most corpora of digitised Arabic texts, studies of hadith with 
digital tools remain scarce or largely limited to the canonical collections, 
especially the Ṣaḥīḥayn of al-Bukhārī (d. 256/870) and Muslim (d. 261/875).
There are three main reasons for the slow emergence of comprehensive 
digital analysis of hadith. First, it is difficult to precisely define and create 
a comprehensive corpus. In fact, building a digital corpus for macro-anal-
ysis poses several challenges, so many researchers turn to already digitised 
corpora that were usually limited to a few (canonical) hadith collections. 
Furthermore, digital texts tend to be riddled with mistakes and inconsisten-
cies. The more they are edited, the more errors they accrue; these include 
typos, omissions, repeated information and so on.5 Editorial tendencies to 
‘correct’ them also sometimes take the text further away from the forms 
in which they have been transmitted historically. The fact that a digital 
version usually omits the critical apparatus of editions makes evaluating 
manuscript transmission and variance even more challenging. A corpus of 
texts reflecting manuscript attestation and variation, while technically pos-
sible, remains a desideratum in the field.6
 3 Blecher, Said the Prophet of God. 
 4 On the continuous tradition of Qur’an interpretation, see Sinai, ‘Die klassische isla-
mische Koranexegese’. For a snapshot of the social practice of hadith transmission in 
late Mamlūk Damascus, see Hirschler, A Monument to Medieval Syrian Book Culture, 
and more generally, Davidson, Carrying on the Tradition. 
 5 A recent study on the computational analysis of a hadith corpus discusses part of the 
painstaking correction work necessary: Syed et al., ‘Verifying Source Citations’.
 6 The exception to this is two projects showcasing the manuscript transmission history  
of the Qur’an: www.corpuscoranicum.de and www.qurangateway.org (accessed 14  
January 2021). While these two projects display exemplary results, their source codes 
are not public, so they fall short in terms of reproducibility. 

 Second, genre classifications in digital collections are rarely consis-
tent. To create a corpus with hadith commentaries, one would first need 
to define what is meant by hadith commentaries. As the introduction to 
this volume makes abundantly clear, this is no trivial question, as there 
are many types of relationships between hadith texts that may or may not 
be defined explicitly as commentary. A text may also fit the definition of 
a commentary in a broader sense even without an explicit acknowledge-
ment on the part of the author, or the use of the terms sharḥ (commen-
tary), ḥāshiya/taʿlīqa (gloss) and so on in the title.7 Most online libraries 
were built without taking these nuances into consideration and, as we see, 
addressing these genre classifications in academic corpora such as Open-
ITI is also painstaking and iterative.8
Finally, the sources of the materials in online libraries can be diffi-
cult to obtain or may be wrongly or inconsistently attributed. Consider  
the following case that combines the challenges of corpus building and 
the digital reproduction of Arabic-Islamic books in a way that reflects the 
history of their transmission. The work of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini  
(d. 1989) entitled al-Taʿlīqa ʿalā al-fawāʾid al-raḍawiyya is a gloss of  
Qāḍī Saʿīd al-Qummī’s9 (d. 1107/1695) commentary on reports of a short 
dialogue between the eighth (Twelver) Shīʿī imam ʿAlī b. Mūsā al-Riḍā  
(d. 203/818) and a Jewish Exilarch (Raʾs al-Jālūt).10 The debates with the 
participation of the Shīʿī imam were first reported by the fourth-/tenth-
century (Twelver) Shīʿī traditionist Ibn Bābawayh (known as al-Shaykh 
al-Ṣadūq, d. 381/991) in his Kitāb al-Tawḥīd and ʿUyūn akhbār al-Riḍā.11 
The commentary tradition is, however, centred on this particular dia-
logue known as ‘ḥadīth Raʾs al-Jālūt’, which begins with al-Qummī. Unlike 
Ibn Bābawayh’s version, al-Qummī’s popular version omits the chain of 
 7 Cornelis van Lit defines commentary in terms of ‘structural textual correspondence’ 
between hypotext and hypertext. Thus, a broad range of texts, including but not limited 
to sharḥ, ḥāshiya/taʿlīqa and so on, are included in the ‘commentary tradition’ that can 
be referred to, independently, as commentary. Van Lit, ‘Commentary and Commentary 
Tradition’. 
 8 See also Lorenz Nigst’s blog ‘Preserving Pre-Modern Terminologies’.
 9 Muḥammad Saʿīd b. Muḥammad Mufīd, known as Qāḍī Saʿīd al-Qummī and known as 
al-Ḥakīm al-Ṣaghīr (The lesser sage), was a Ṣafavid-era polymath like his famous teacher, 
Mullā Muḥsin al-Fayḍ al-Kāshānī (d. c. 1091/1680). Al-Qummī’s magnum opus, Sharḥ 
Tawḥīd al-Ṣadūq, is a three-volume commentary on Ibn Bābawayh’s hadith collection 
(entitled the Kitāb al-Tawḥīd) and has recently been added to the OpenITI corpus.
10 The famous majālis of ʿAlī b. Mūsā al-Riḍā, who was appointed heir apparent by the 
ʿAbbāsid caliph al-Maʾmūn (d. 218/833) before his premature death, have been anal-
ysed by several scholars. See Wasserstrom, Between Muslim and Jew; Wasserstein, ‘The 
“Majlis of al-Riḍā”’; Cooperson, Classical Arabic Biography, 70–106; see also Sahner, ‘A 
Zoroastrian Dispute in the Caliph’s Court’, 69–70. 
11 Al-Qummī, Kitāb al-Tawḥīd, 1:139–182.
266 
BEDNARKIEWICZ, QURBONIEV AND VAN DEN BOSSCHE

  
IN THE DIGITAL AGE 
267
transmitters.12 Despite this, the enigmatic nature of the questions raised 
by the Jewish scholar and the Imam’s answers left them open to inter-
pretation and thus have continuously provided occasions for elucidation  
and commentary by later scholars.13 
In the ShiaOnlineLibrary the digital edition of the book is solely attrib-
uted to the first commentator, Qāḍī Saʿīd al-Qummī. While not incorrect 
per se, doing so fails to highlight Khomeini’s important intervention in 
clarifying, expanding and challenging al-Qummī’s interpretation of the 
hadith. It also presents an ahistorical picture of a commentary tradition 
that in fact continues to the present day. 
When preparing digital texts, these kinds of complex relationships 
should be recorded in metadata, so that key information about the trans-
mission of a text, as well as its authorship, provenance and relationship 
to other texts in a corpus can be easily and reliably accessed. Having this 
information available facilitates further research, including the distant 
reading (that is, computational reading and analysis of textual metadata, 
as opposed to traditional close reading)14 and analysis of the corpus and 
the study of intertextual networks. Thus, upon including these texts in 
the OpenITI corpus, the KITAB team addressed this metadata issue. In 
OpenITI, authorship is principally attributed to the latest commentator 
(in this case Khomeini), whereas various relationships to other books are 
recorded in the metadata.15 For example, a similar situation exists for Nahj 
al-balāgha, which some online libraries attribute to ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib (d. 40/ 
661), because it is a compilation of his speeches, letters and sayings, though 
certainly the compilation itself was not made by him. In fact, the compila-
tion was only undertaken in the late fourth/tenth to the early fifth/eleventh 
century by al-Sharīf al-Rāḍī (d. 406/1015), or, less likely, by his brother 
al-Sharīf al-Murtaḍā (d. 436/1044).16 These cases illustrate some challenges 
12 See Qāḍī Saʿīd al-Qummī’s introduction to his commentary, where he notes the popu-
larity of the hadith among his Shīʿī colleagues. Khomeini, al-Taʿlīqa, 40.
13 There are fifteen known commentaries on this hadith preserved in at least 132 man-
uscripts, mostly in Iranian libraries. Al-Fawāʾid al-raḍawiyya is part of al-Qummī’s 
incomplete Arbaʿīniyyāt, and was published alongside Khomeini’s taʿlīqa (gloss). See 
KITAB’s blogpost for a detailed account: Qurboniev, ‘Between Manuscripts and Digital 
Texts’; see also Ḥusaynī, ‘Sharḥ-i Ḥadīth-i Raʾs al-Jālūt’, 234–236. 
14 See Moretti, Distant Reading.
15 In practice, these issues need to be addressed on a case-by-case basis. For instance, 
another commentary discussed in this chapter, al-Māzandarānī’s Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī (on 
which, see below) was published with glosses by Abū al-Ḥasan al-Shaʿrānī, but because 
these taʿlīqāt are not so significant that they alter the general composition of the text, it 
makes sense to list the first commentator as the main author in the metadata. Moreover, 
in the printed edition, the glosses are appended as footnotes, which are normally removed 
(alongside editorial sections and the critical apparatus) when a text is added to the corpus.
16 Hassan, ‘A Critical Study of Nahj al-Balāgha’, 20–24. 

 of corpus building and the digital reproduction and referencing of Islamic 
texts in a way that reflects the history of their reception and transmission. 
Yet these cases also highlight the nature of hadith commentary as a living 
and discursive Islamic tradition. 
Methods and Reproducibility
Once a digital corpus is established, the challenge lies in choosing appropri-
ate analytic methods. A crucial consideration in this regard is that digital 
corpora and computational tools will only attain their full potential in the 
service of the scholarly community if the results can be reproduced and the 
tools can be repurposed for other datasets or research questions.17 These 
considerations can be addressed by furnishing comprehensive metadata for 
the texts and making the tools available with well-documented, open-source 
codes. More importantly, reproducible results are required for intersubjec-
tive verifiability (that is, what cannot be reproduced, cannot be verified and 
remains subjective; just like any article ought to have an accurate bibliogra-
phy, computational analyses must be presented with detailed documenta-
tion to allow other scholars to confirm or refute the results).18 As the number 
of projects in Islamic studies increases, and these projects invest resources 
in the development of technologies to perform computational analysis on 
textual materials, the reproducibility of results becomes a primary concern 
and is now regularly required by funding institutions. 
The issue with the absence of reproducible results can be illustrated with 
reference to an issue faced by many scholars working with hadith literature, 
namely, isnād recognition. While humans can easily distinguish a chain of 
transmitters, for computers, an isnād is a string of characters like any other. 
Scholars who want to automate the traditional isnād analysis on a given had-
ith corpus must find a way for computers to distinguish between isnād and 
non-isnād textual data. Over the past ten years or so, several computer sci-
entists have developed methods to address this issue. However, generally, 
their metrics, tools or both, were not made available, so their methods do 
not allow for cross-checking and have not been used outside a single paper.19 
17 Alger, Defense of the Scientific Hypothesis.
18 See the discussion of ‘intersubjectivity’ in Alger, Defense of the Scientific Hypothesis, 9 
and 41.
19 Moath Najeeb has explored two methods with Muslim’s Ṣaḥīḥ: In 2016 he used a par-
ticular statistical model (the so-called Hidden Markov Model) (see Najeeb, ‘Processing 
of “Hadith Isnad”’) and in 2020, he used an algorithm borrowed from genetic studies 
(see Najeeb, ‘A Novel Hadith Processing Approach’ and ‘XML Database’). In 2018 and 
2019, Maraoui Haddar and Romary developed a hadith schema for TEI and an unde-
scribed (hence unreproducible) system to segment hadith automatically. See Maraoui 
et al., ‘Encoding Prototype’; and Maraoui et al., ‘Segmentation Tool for Hadith Corpus’.
268 
BEDNARKIEWICZ, QURBONIEV AND VAN DEN BOSSCHE

  
IN THE DIGITAL AGE 
269
This deficit in reproducibility has forced scholars who want to automatically 
isolate isnāds to constantly start over. While the primary concern for many 
of these studies has ultimately been the authentication of ‘sound’ hadith or 
isnāds,20 automatically recognising isnāds is also necessary when studying 
patterns of reuse, as is done in the KITAB project with the passim software 
(see below). Chains of transmitters as text reuse should be distinguished 
from other instances of text reuse that indicate direct and indirect quota-
tions, paraphrases, etc. In order to qualitatively highlight these instances in 
the OpenITI corpus, the passim software must be able to distinguish the 
chains of transmitters from other forms of text reuse.
To tackle these issues, members of the OpenITI-related KITAB proj-
ect have been working on a new approach: Ryan Muther has trained a 
machine learning model on a manually annotated corpus extracted from 
OpenITI that is much larger than the Ṣaḥīḥayn or even hadith collections 
in general.21 The primary goal of this project was to automatically mark the 
isnāds in texts, so they can either be excluded from a given text, or can be 
compiled in a separate corpus. The task is complex, however, as isnāds are 
much more diverse than initially thought, and the algorithm designed by 
Muther et al. only succeeded in identifying the beginning of the isnād. In 
the latest study on the topic, Alkaoud and Syed used different algorithms 
and could identify all isnāds in a small corpus. These are significant steps 
forward toward the automation of isnād recognition.22 The close collabora-
tion between scholars in Islamic studies and computer scientists exempli-
fied in the studies of Muther and Alkaoud and Syed remains exceptional in 
the field, but is highly desirable for future projects. 
The OpenITI Corpus
OpenITI is a corpus of digital texts from the premodern Islamic world 
created as a joint venture by research teams at various institutions. It 
aims to become as comprehensive as possible and in doing so provide 
the basic infrastructure for digital reading and information retrieval, and 
provide more complex forms of computational analysis, both with the 
entire corpus and with smaller sub-corpora based on period, genre or 
20 Examples of models developed to authenticate hadith can be found in Harrag et al., 
‘Vector Space Model’.
21 Muther and Smith, ‘Tracing Traditions’. The model is open source and was developed 
in public to guarantee reproducibility; the training data annotated by members of  
the KITAB team is stored in a GitHub repository, <https://github.com/kitab-project-
org/training-data> (accessed October 2022).
22 Alkaoud and Syed, ‘Learning to Identify Narrators’, 335–342. This study builds on  
previous work by the team: Syed et al., ‘Verifying Source Citations’ and Alkaoud and 
Syed, ‘On the Importance of Tokenization’.

 region.23 While the aim of the project is to eventually develop corpora for 
several relevant languages – Ottoman Turkish, Chaghatay, Urdu and so 
on – at the moment only Arabic and to a much lesser degree Persian are 
represented. The Arabic content is curated and managed by members of 
the KITAB Project.24 They curate texts included in other online corpora 
and evaluate their quality by cross-checking the digital versions with the 
physical editions on which they are based, identifying issues in the digital 
texts; these issues range from missing parts to typos and residual mark-
ups or footnotes. This is done at the same time as structural annotation 
of the texts is undertaken to make them more navigable and machine 
readable.25 Further quality control and correction takes place in a second 
stage when texts are vetted by other annotators. 
The corpus is hosted on GitHub and snapshots are periodically made 
available in ready-to-use form through Zenodo with a DOI to make them 
citable.26 A digital reading environment is also being developed to enable 
researchers to visually query parts of the corpus. As of February 2020, the 
OpenITI corpus consisted of 4,129 unique texts – that is, not counting dif-
ferent versions of the same text. Most of the texts were sourced from three 
major digital libraries: Shamela, al-Jāmiʿ al-Kabīr and ShiaOnlineLibrary. 
Various new texts from these digital libraries and from other online librar-
ies are gradually being added. Additionally, texts that constitute gaps in the 
corpus are being digitised and researchers are invited to submit texts they 
have typed or digitised through OCR.27 
23 Romanov et al., ‘Open Islamicate Texts Initiative’. An example of computational analy-
sis of a small corpus extracted from OpenITI can be found in the blogpost of Syed, 
‘An Experiment’. Two further examples of smaller corpora based, at least in part, on 
OpenITI texts are first, a corpus of late mediaeval Syro-Egyptian historiographic texts 
compiled for the ‘Mamlukisation of the Mamluk Sultanate II’ project directed by Jo 
Van Steenbergen, and second, a corpus of texts from four broad genres (‘jurisprudence, 
inter-faith literature, early modern and modern journalism, and Arabic poetry’) for the 
‘Senses of Islam’ project directed by Christian Lange.
24 KITAB is an acronym for ‘Knowledge, Information Technology and the Arabic Book’. The 
project is funded by the European Research Council and led by Sarah Savant. In the project, 
the OpenITI corpus is used to study Arabic book history through large-scale text reuse data. 
The Persian side of OpenITI is managed by Matthew Miller and focuses on developing 
Optical Character Recognition (OCR) technology for premodern Persian and Arabic, and 
on developing the ‘Persian Digital Library’, which is currently heavily dominated by poetry. 
See <https://persdigumd.github.io/PDL/corpus-stats.html> (accessed October 2022). 
25 For the description of the basic markup language used for the annotation see 
Romanov, ‘OpenITI mARkdown’, <https://maximromanov.github.io/mARkdown/> 
(accessed October 2022).
26 The most recent snapshot of the corpus is Nigst et al., OpenITI.
27 Currently, there is no formal procedure to contribute new texts; interested researchers 
contact team members. For a guide to the IDs for collections currently in OpenITI as 
well as general documentation on the corpus, see <https://openiti.github.io/documen-
tation> (accessed October 2022). 
270 
BEDNARKIEWICZ, QURBONIEV AND VAN DEN BOSSCHE

  
IN THE DIGITAL AGE 
271
Adding detailed metadata for texts in the corpus is an important goal. 
This includes information about authors, books, book relationships and 
also genre classifications. As noted above, scholars often disagree on genre 
classifications, and finding a system that works across the corpus, taking 
account of premodern classifications, is a work in progress. The tagging 
system adopted for genre classification in OpenITI is a good example of a 
combination of automated and manual approaches. In the case of hadith 
literature (see Figure 10.1), OpenITI currently contains two types of texts 
tagged as ‘hadith’: the texts that were labelled hadith in the digital librar-
ies from which they were extracted (tag: HADITH) and the titles that Carl 
Brockelmann classified as hadith in his Geschichte der arabischen Literatur 
(tag: GAL@hadith).28 The existence of two tags (‘HADITH’ and ‘GAL@
hadith’) allows scholars to choose their preferred classification or to com-
bine the two, as GAL identified 101 hadith titles that are not recognised as 
such in the digital libraries. Scholars can even add their own classification 
in order to match the needs of their research, for instance, hadith texts 
from Iraqi scholars or a combination of hadith and philosophical texts. 
This system offers great flexibility for a variety of types of research and can 
be continually improved.
The representativeness of the hadith corpus remains an issue, although 
in general it is more balanced and undergoes higher quality control than 
comparably large digital collections of other Arabic texts. For hadith par-
ticularly, major Sunnī collections and commentaries are represented, and 
many others have been prepared to be added to the corpus. By contrast, 
while there are numerous commentaries on canonical Shīʿī hadith collec-
tions, only a few have been added to OpenITI so far. Even the especially 
rich tradition related to Nahj al-balāgha is only represented by the original 
compilation by al-Sharīf al-Rāḍī, Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd’s important Sharḥ and 
Muḥammad ʿAbduh’s twentieth-century commentary, though hundreds  
28 The collation of data from GAL with the OpenITI corpus was done by Walid A. Akef. 
Figure 10.1 Hadith classification in the OpenITI corpus, OpenITI: 
4,129 unique texts (2,379 non-hadith texts; Digital libraries: 1,649 texts 
labelled as ‘hadith’ in digital libraries) (360 in digital libraries and GAL). 
GAL: 461 texts labelled ‘hadith’ in GAL (101 texts not labelled hadith in 
digital libraries).

 of commentaries on this text exist.29 Similarly, more than twenty sharḥs 
and thirty ḥāshiyas have been written on al-Kulaynī’s al-Kāfī,30 but only 
four Ṣafavid-era commentaries have been added to the corpus so far,  
while the equally rich commentary tradition on other collections is still 
underrepresented.31 Moreover, there are numerous addenda, supplements, 
indices and translations of Shīʿī hadith works, most notably into Persian, 
which must also be considered within the perimeters of hadith commen-
tary as a literary and living tradition. Significant gaps such as these are 
being identified and addressed. 
Examples of Text Reuse in Hadith  
Commentaries from OpenITI
Text reuse has been an important focus of research into historical texts for 
centuries. Indeed, it is an essential element of the historical and philologi-
cal method, and many classical studies of Islamic history have been built 
around painstaking comparisons of reports to establish stemmas of filia-
tion. This kind of research typically requires scholars to read widely and 
very closely to discern patterns of intertextuality, allusion, copying, plagia-
rism and so on. The data provided by passim on the OpenITI corpus do 
not aim to replace this part of the research process, but provide additional 
information and perspectives to aid the enquiry into textual relationships, 
while casting a much wider net to consider more candidates for text reuse 
or closer analysis.32
Several research questions in the study of hadith commentaries can be 
explored with a text reuse approach. For example, to what extent do com-
mentators quote hadith collections and how do they define what to quote 
and what not to quote? Where do commentaries adhere to the textual 
structure of hadith collections and where do they diverge? Which texts are 
quoted or reused most in hadith commentaries and which other texts quote 
29 For issues, reuse data and visualisations of this commentarial tradition, see Van Den 
Bossche, ‘On Commentaries’. The complicated situation of Nahj al-balāgha outlined 
in this blog post has now been solved by deleting the footnotes of Nahj al-balāgha (this 
version is now filed as the work of al-Sharīf al-Rāḍī), and a separate version that includes 
the footnotes has been created and is now filed as the work of Muḥammad ʿAbduh. 
30 See Muḥammad Ḥusayn al-Dirāyatī’s editorial introduction to al-Nāʾīlī, al-Ḥāshiya, 5. 
Aghā Buzurg al-Ṭihrānī lists 27 commentaries and 10 ḥāshiyas in his bibliography of 
Shīʿī works; al-Ṭihrānī, al-Dharīʿa, 13:95–99.
31 The commentaries currently available in the corpus are al-ʿĀmilī, al-Ḥāshiya; Mīr 
Dāmād, al-Rawashiḥ al-samāwiyya; al-Māzandarānī, Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī; al-Nāʾilī, 
al-Ḥāshiya.
32 For some observations on how passim works, as well as some pitfalls, see Barber, 
‘Adventures in Alignments’.
272 
BEDNARKIEWICZ, QURBONIEV AND VAN DEN BOSSCHE

  
IN THE DIGITAL AGE 
273
or reuse hadith commentaries the most? How closely related are two dif-
ferent commentaries on the same text? How widely attested are particu-
lar hadiths across the corpus? While scholars researching a project using 
physical books must select one textual type or characteristic or must restrict 
themselves to one period for a project to be manageable, the text reuse algo-
rithm works better when given a large amount of data. Such passim data 
is extremely helpful in examining the broader picture, confirming known 
relationships and highlighting unexpected discrepancies and similarities 
between the most famous commentaries as well as lesser-known ones. 
It will be no surprise that of the texts showing the most reuse in the 
OpenITI corpus the majority are hadith works (both collections and com-
mentaries) or works containing a great number of hadiths.33 The expansive 
commentary tradition is partially responsible for these high numbers but 
more generally, the prevalence of hadith in the Arabic written tradition is 
such that overlapping traditions are found in many texts. Furthermore, as 
noted, because of the prevalence of similar strings of names (especially in 
chains of transmitters) across the corpus, some of the reuse detected by 
passim is not meaningful and thus requires closer analysis. We must also 
keep in mind the caveats noted above concerning representativeness and 
the fact that such statistics are snapshots of a corpus in constant evolution. 
Nevertheless, the kind of raw statistics on text reuse provided now already 
help situate a given work in the tradition as a whole.
One of the texts with the highest level of reuse in the OpenITI corpus is 
Badr al-Dīn al-ʿAynī’s (d. 855/1451) ʿUmdat al-qārī, with 224,735 instances 
recorded for it by passim, across 2,210 individual books. While extremely 
valuable insights on its make-up and its relationship to other commen-
taries of the period, notably Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī’s (d. 852/1449) Fatḥ 
al-Bārī, have been formulated recently by Joel Blecher, the sheer length of 
the work and of works with which it shares materials, largely precludes an 
in-depth study. One way to study its relationship to the wider corpus can 
be seen in Figure 10.2, which visualises the instances of reuse in al-ʿAynī 
across time. 
The graph in Figure 10.2 shows the strong continuity of the hadith com-
mentary tradition, and particularly of al-Bukhārī’s Ṣaḥīḥ, across time. The 
highest instances of text reuse of al-ʿAynī’s ʿUmdat al-qārī are apparent in  
33 For the following observations, we use the statistics generated based on the run of pas-
sim in February 2020. Of the top six reusers (based on number of instances of reuse 
with texts across the corpus) three are directly related to hadith (two collections and 
one commentary): Ibn Ḥanbal’s Musnad, ʿAlā al-Dīn al-Hindī’s Kanz al-ʿummāl, and 
al-ʿAynī’s ʿUmdat al-qārī. The three remaining works in the list are two historical works 
and one tafsīr, all heavily reliant on hadith: Ibn ʿAsākir’s Tārīkh madīnat Dimashq (the 
number one reuser), Ibn Kathīr’s al-Bidāya wa-l-nihāya, and Shams al-Dīn al-Qurṭubī’s 
(d. 671/1273) al-Jāmiʿ li-aḥkām al-Qurʾān. 

 Aḥmad al-Qasṭallānī’s (d. 923/1517) Irshād al-sārī (914,038 word matches), 
followed by al-Bukhārī’s Ṣaḥīḥ (490,455 word matches) and Ibn Ḥajar’s 
Fatḥ al-Bārī (498,267). We then find two commentaries from Andalusian 
scholars: the Sharḥ Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī (191,179 word matches) by Ibn Baṭṭāl 
al-Qurṭubī (d. 449/1057) and al-Mukhtaṣar al-naṣīḥ (159,615 word matches) 
by al-Muhallab b. Abī Ṣufra (d. c. 435/1044). With the insights provided 
by Joel Blecher’s research in mind, these names are not surprising, as they 
represent some of the best received commentaries on al-Bukhārī across 
the ages. However, the statistics do call attention to al-Qasṭallānī’s Irshād 
al-sārī as a major commentary that should be considered. Indeed, the reuse 
between al-ʿAynī and al-Qasṭallānī greatly exceeds the total word count of 
al-Bukhārī’s Ṣaḥīḥ (593,471), which suggests that al-Qasṭallānī did not just 
quote the same traditions from al-Bukhārī as al-ʿAynī did, but must have 
reused al-ʿAynī’s work and his sources extensively. This relationship is not 
explicitly stated by al-Qasṭallānī, who in his introduction to Irshād al-sārī 
diligently notes the various commentaries on al-Bukhārī that preceded his 
own, but does not name ʿUmdat al-qārī as more important than other com-
mentaries. He assesses the accusations that al-ʿAynī plagiarised Ibn Ḥajar, 
but avoids intervening forcefully in the discussion. Instead, he notes that 
al-ʿAynī also added many beneficial insights on the rhetorical aspects of the 
traditions.34 Throughout the remainder of the text he reproduces many of 
those insights, citing both al-ʿAynī and Ibn Ḥajar hundreds of times. The 
34 Al-Qasṭallānī, Irshād al-sārī, 1:59–60. The digital edition in OpenITI is based on the ten-
volume 1905 Būlāq printing of the text, edited by Ibrāhīm ʿAbd al-Ghaffār al-Dusūqī. 
The first printing of the text at the same press was in 1850.
Figure 10.2 Reuse timeline for Badr al-Dīn al-ʿAyni’s ʿUmdat al-qārī. The 
abscissa sorts books by the death date of their author in the Hijrī calen-
dar. The ordinate shows the number of word matches – in other words, 
instances of text reuse – with ʿUmdat al-qārī. The dot’s area is proportional 
to the length of the text (in words).
274 
BEDNARKIEWICZ, QURBONIEV AND VAN DEN BOSSCHE

  
IN THE DIGITAL AGE 
275
statistics and his position on this controversy indicate that al-Qasṭallānī’s 
work deserves a more extensive study in the context of the continued com-
mentary tradition on al-Bukhārī in the late Mamlūk period, and given the 
reception and evaluation of the great works of generations immediately  
preceding and following al-Qasṭallānī.35
The data for al-ʿAynī’s and al-Qasṭallānī’s commentaries are insightful 
because the relevant corpus, while certainly not complete, is large enough 
to be meaningful and contains commentaries that have generally been 
less studied.36 If we look at the Shīʿī tradition, however, the limitations of 
this approach become clear. While OpenITI is still useful in identifying 
a high number of reuse instances for texts present in OpenITI, as noted 
above, most important Shīʿī commentaries have not yet been included in 
the corpus, so the data has obvious gaps and a reuse timeline like that in 
Figure 10.2 would be notably less representative. However, as long as at 
least two relevant texts are included in the corpus, meaningful observa-
tions about reuse can be made. The passim output in the form of paired 
alignments of shared passages between texts (that is, passages identified in 
any given two texts that show enough overlap of words to be considered 
text reuse) can be used to explore intertextuality in any given corpus, to 
compare variant transmissions of a text and to determine direct and indi-
rect relationships between books. For commentaries in particular, this type 
of visualisation highlights the ‘structural textual correspondence’ that Eric 
van Lit uses to define a commentary. Various blog posts by KITAB team 
members are devoted to case studies using this type of visualisation that are 
of broad interest to the study of hadith commentaries. These include Sarah 
Savant’s study of the relationship of three known transmissions of Mālik’s 
Muwaṭṭaʾ,37 Aslisho Qurboniev’s study of the relationship between a num-
ber of Shīʿī hadith collections,38 and Gowaart Van Den Bossche’s already 
noted exploration of Nahj al-balāgha and its Sharḥ by Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd. 
As a further example, we consider the case of Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī  
by Muḥammad Ṣāliḥ al-Māzandarānī (d. 1081/1669), a commentary on  
35 Despite remaining an important reference work in the centuries following its first dis-
semination, it appears that al-Qasṭallānī’s commentary has not received much mod-
ern scholarly attention since Brockelmann’s entry devoted to him in EI2. Brockelmann, 
‘al-Ḳasṭallānī’. For very brief comments about al-Qasṭallānī’s commentary, see Tokatly, 
‘The Aʿlām al-ḥadīth of al-Khaṭṭābī’, 54 n.4.
36 At least three important works were not included in the February 2020 passim run: 
al-Suyūṭī’s al-Tawshīḥ ʿala al-Jāmiʿ al-ṣaḥīḥ, Shams al-Dīn al-Kirmānī’s (d. 786/1384) 
al-Kawākib al-darārī fī sharḥ Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī and Ibn Mulaqqin’s (d. 803/1401) 
al-Tawḍīḥ li-sharḥ al-Jāmiʿ al-ṣaḥīḥ. All of these have since been added to the corpus 
and will be included in future passim runs. 
37 Savant, ‘A Tale of Three “Versions”’.
38 Qurboniev, ‘Algorithmic Reading of Shīʿī Hadith Collections’.

 Muḥammad b. Yaʿqūb al-Kulaynī’s (d. 329/941) Uṣūl al-Kāfī, visualised 
below in Figure 10.3. The graph shows a clear alignment of Sharḥ Uṣūl 
al-Kāfī with Uṣūl al-Kāfī and with its final part (commonly known as 
Rawḍat al-Kāfī).39 The large gap in the alignments corresponds to the  
Furūʿ al-Kāfī, the middle section of al-Kāfī. It is said that al-Māzandarānī 
did not comment on this part, because someone had questioned his com-
petence and reminded him that he was not a mujtahid. While there is  
some evidence that in fact, al-Māzandarānī did comment on the furūʿ 
part of the Kāfī, these alignments confirm the general supposition of 
the relationship between the two texts.40 Thus, a distant reading of the 
text confirms that Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī is a systematic commentary on  
the Uṣūl al-Kāfī and on the Rawḍat al-Kāfī, but not on Furūʿ al-Kāfī.  
39 The actual final parts of both digital texts which show little alignment consist of end-
notes. In principle these sections should be excluded, but in this case, they were preserved 
because neither text had yet been annotated.
40 The Indian Shīʿī scholar al-Sayyid Ḥāmid Ḥusayn al-Lakhnawī (d. 1306/1888) claimed 
to have had access to ‘one of the volumes of [al-Māzandarānī’s] commentary on the 
furūʿ part’, and informed his Persian colleague Mīrzā Ḥusayn al-Nūrī al-Ṭabarsī (d. 
1902) of this in his letters. This would contradict the above notion. See al-Shaʿrānī’s 
introduction to al-Māzandarānī’s Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī, 8. Aghā Buzurg al-Ṭihrānī, who 
consulted several manuscripts of the work in Iranian and Iraqi libraries, also mentions 
his partial commentary on the furūʿ part of al-Kāfī, but, as we see, the passim alignments 
do not indicate any significant textual overlap with this part. See al-Ṭihrānī, al-Dharīʿa, 
13:97–98, 297.
Figure 10.3 Pairwise alignment plot of text reuse between al-Māzandarānī’s 
commentary, Sharḥ ʿUṣūl al-Kāfī (upper) and al-Kulaynī’s Uṣūl al-Kāfī 
(lower). The dark grey lines mark the position of reuse passages (up to 300 
words) within the individual texts and the light grey lines mark their links. 
This is a screenshot from the KITAB visualisation app developed by Sohail 
Merchant.
276 
BEDNARKIEWICZ, QURBONIEV AND VAN DEN BOSSCHE

  
IN THE DIGITAL AGE 
277
The relationship thus represents an ‘intentional’ and ‘structural textual 
correspondence’, as per van Lit’s definition cited above, but only with these 
parts of the compilation. 
Experiments are also being undertaken to navigate the data in other 
ways, from large scale ‘big data’ to discern corpus-wide trends, to more 
fine-grained analysis of common passages in a small sub-corpus. A prom-
ising approach is what is referred to as studying the ‘DNA’ of one large 
book that reuses material from across a wide variety of sources. This DNA 
approach is especially useful for studying the patchwork of reused texts 
in such vast multi-volume works as al-Nuwayrī’s (d. 733/1333) Nihāyat 
al-arab or al-Ṭabarī’s (d. 310/923) Tārīkh al-rusul wa-l-mulūk. The next 
in line for such analysis should be hadith commentaries of especially wide-
ranging contents, such as Ibn Ḥajar’s Fatḥ al-Bārī, al-ʿAynī’s ʿUmdat al-qārī 
or Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd’s Sharḥ Nahj al-balāgha. 
Conclusion
Text reuse identification and the macro-analytical approach it facilitates 
have potential to advance the study of premodern Arabic literature gener-
ally and especially hadith commentaries. The case studies presented here 
can be easily multiplied, while a corpus-wide analysis can also be under-
taken in much more detail. With the ever-increasing number of digital texts 
available online, the corpus on which computational analysis can be per-
formed will become more representative. To accelerate this process, schol-
ars can proactively identify the gaps and work together to digitise missing 
texts. Improving quality control and better reporting of metadata will also 
help this process. While combining several sources of metadata and auto-
matically cross-validating them shows signs of success, much work remains 
to be done before a full-scale and reliable study of the OpenITI corpus can 
be undertaken. Ideally, scholars will contribute their knowledge to improve 
this metadata. Gaps notwithstanding, the case of the hadith commentary 
tradition aptly illustrates the ways computational methods and the macro-
analytical approach can potentially advance modern hadith studies with 
relatively straightforward corpus building and statistical methods that can 
be easily understood and manipulated. Quality-controlled digital corpora, 
advanced statistical methods, high standards for reproducibility and user-
friendly software can support and advance traditional research on premod-
ern Arabic literature in the digital age. For hadith commentaries this means 
that scholars will be able to better map professional and textual networks 
relevant for the texts they study. It will also be possible to identify sources 
more easily across a wide-ranging corpus. Digital methods as such can 
help us to gain better insights into the evolution of hadith commentary, its 
working methods and, indeed, its practice in general. 

 Bibliography 
Alger, B. Defense of the Scientific Hypothesis: From Reproducibility Crisis to Big 
Data. New York: Oxford University Press, 2020.
Alkaoud M. and M. Syed. ‘On the Importance of Tokenization in Arabic 
Embedding Models.’ In Proceedings of the Fifth Arabic Natural Language 
Processing Workshop, pp. 119–129. Barcelona: Association for Computational 
Linguistics, 2020.
Alkaoud, M. and M. Syed. ‘Learning to Identify Narrators in Classical Arabic Texts.’ 
Procedia Computer Science, AI in Computational Linguistics 189 (1 January 
2021): 335–342.
al-ʿĀmilī, Badr al-Dīn b. Aḥmad al-Ḥusaynī. al-Ḥāshiya ʿalā Usūl al-Kāfī. Edited by 
ʿAlī al-Fāḍilī. Qum: Dār al-Ḥadīth li-l-Ṭibāʿa wa-l-Nashr, 1383/2004.
Barber, M. ‘Adventures in Alignments.’ Kitab Project (2020). <https://kitab-project.org/
Adventures-in-Alignments-Training-an-Algorithm-to-Recognise-Text-Reuse/>, 
accessed 7 August 2020. 
Blecher, J. Said the Prophet of God: Hadith Commentary Across a Millenium. 
Oakland: University of California Press, 2018.
Brockelmann, C. ‘al-Ḳasṭallānī’, in EI2, 4:736–737. 
Cooperson, M. Classical Arabic Biography: The Heirs of the Prophet in the Age  
of al-Maʾmūn. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Cordell R. and D. Smith. Viral Texts: Mapping Networks of Reprinting in 19th-
Century Newspapers and Magazines. Viral Texts Project Blog (2017): http://
viraltexts.org, accessed 12 August 2020.
Davidson, G. Carrying on the Tradition: A Social and Intellectual History of Hadith 
Transmission across a Thousand Years. Leiden: Brill, 2019.
Harrag, F., A. Hamdi-Cherif, and E. El-Qawasmeh. ‘Vector Space Model for 
Arabic Information Retrieval – Application to ‘Hadith’ Indexing.’ In 2008 
First International Conference on the Applications of Digital Information and 
Web Technologies (ICADIWT), pp. 107–112, 2008. <https://doi.org/10.1109/
ICADIWT.2008.4664328>.
Hassan, S. M. W. ‘A Critical Study of Nahj al-balāgha.’ PhD dissertation, Univer-
sity of Edinburgh, 1979.
Hirschler, K. A Monument to Medieval Syrian Book Culture: The Library of Ibn 
ʿAbd al-Hādī. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2019. 
Ḥusaynī, Sayyid Muḥammad Riḍā. ‘Sharḥ-i Ḥadīth-i Raʾs al-Jālūt.’ Mīrāth-i 
Ḥadīth-i Shīʿa 2 (1378/1999): 233–254.
Jockers, M. L. Macroanalysis: Digital Methods and Literary History. Baltimore: 
University of Illinois Press, 2013.
Khomeini, R. al-Taʿlīqa ʿalā al-fawāʾid al-raḍawiyya. Tehran: Muʾassassat Tanẓīm 
wa-Nashr Āthār al-Imām al-Khumaynī, 1378/1999.
Maraoui, H., K. Haddar, and L. Romary. ‘Encoding Prototype of al-Hadith al-Shareef 
in TEI.’ In A. Lachkar et al. (eds), Arabic Language Processing: From Theory to 
Practice, pp. 217–229. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2018.
Maraoui, H., K. Haddar, and L. Romary. ‘Segmentation Tool for Hadith Corpus to 
Generate TEI Encoding.’ In K. Shaalan et al. (eds), Proceedings of the International 
278 
BEDNARKIEWICZ, QURBONIEV AND VAN DEN BOSSCHE

  
IN THE DIGITAL AGE 
279
Conference on Advanced Intelligent Systems and Informatics 2018, pp. 252–260. 
Cham, Switzerland: Springer International Publishing, 2019.
al-Māzandarānī, Muḥammad Ṣāliḥ. Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī. Edited by Mīrzā Abū 
al-Ḥasan al-Shaʿrānī. 12 vols. Beirut: Dār Iḥyāʾ al-Turāth al-ʿArabī li-l-Ṭibāʿa 
wa-l-Nashr wa-l-Tawzīʿ, 1421/2000.
Mīr Dāmād, Muḥammad Bāqir al-Ḥusaynī al-Astarabādī. al-Rawashiḥ al-samāwiyya 
fī sharḥ aḥadīth al-imāmiyya. Edited by Ghulāmḥusayn Qayṣariyyahā and 
Niʿmatullāh al-Jalīlī. Qum: Dār al-Ḥadīth li-l-Ṭibāʿa wa-l-Nashr, 1380 Sh/ 
1422 [2001].
Moretti, F. Distant Reading. London: Verso, 2013.
Muther, R. and Smith, D. ‘Tracing Traditions: Automatic Extraction of Isnads 
from Classical Arabic Texts.’ In Proceedings of the Fifth Arabic Natural Lan-
guage Processing Workshop, pp. 130–138. Barcelona: Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, 2020. 
al-Nāʾilī, Rafīʿ al-Dīn Muḥammad b. Haydar. al-Ḥāshiya ʿalā Uṣūl al-Kāfī. Edited 
by Muḥammad Ḥusayn al-Dirāyatī. Qum: Dār al-Ḥadīth li-l-Ṭibāʿa wa-l-
Nashr, 1383 Sh/1424/[2003].
Najeeb, M. M. A. ‘A Novel Hadith Processing Approach Based on Genetic Algo-
rithms.’ IEEE Access 8 (2020): 20233–20244. 
Najeeb, M. M. A. ‘Processing of “Hadith Isnad” Based on Hidden Markov Model.’ 
International Journal of Engineering and Technology 6, no. 1 (2016): 50–55.
Najeeb, M. M. A. ‘XML Database for Hadith and Narrators.’ American Journal of 
Applied Sciences 13, no. 1 (2016): 55–63.
Nigst, L. ‘Preserving Pre-Modern Terminologies.’ Kitab Project (2020): https://kitab-
project.org/Preserving-Pre-Modern-Terminologies/, accessed 6 August 2020.
Nigst, L., M. Romanov, S. Bowen Savant, M. Seydi, and P. Verkinderen. OpenITI: 
A Machine-Readable Corpus of Islamicate Texts (Version 2020.1.2) [Data set] 
(Zenodo, 2020), <http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3891466>.
al-Qasṭallānī, Aḥmad b. Muḥammad b. Abī Bakr. Irshād al-sārī ilā sharḥ Ṣaḥīḥ 
al-Bukhārī. Edited by Muḥammad ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz al-Khālidī. 15 vols. Beirut: Dār 
al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyya, 1416/1996.
al-Qummī, Muḥammad b. ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn b. Bābawayh. Kitāb al-Tawḥīd. 
Edited by Sayyid Hāshim al-Ḥusaynī al-Ṭihrānī. Qum: Manshūrāt Jamāʿat 
al-Mudarrisīn fī al-Ḥawzat al-ʿIlmiyya, n.d.
al-Qummī, Muḥammad b. ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn b. Bābawayh. ʿUyūn akhbār al-Riḍā. 2 
vols. Qum: Intishārāt al-Sharīf al-Raḍī, 1378/1999.
al-Qummī, Muḥammad b. ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn b. Bābawayh. al-Arbaʿīniyyāt li-kashfi 
anwār al-qudsiyyāt. Edited by Najafqulī Ḥabībī. Tehran: Mīrās-i Maktūb, 
1381/2002.
Qurboniev, A. ‘Algorithmic Reading of Shīʿī Hadith Collections: Direct Borrowing 
and Common Sources.’ Kitab Project (2020). https://kitab-project.org/Algo-
rithmic-Reading-of-Shi%CA%BFi-Hadith-Collections-Direct-Borrowing-
and-Common-Sources/, accessed 26 June 2020.
Qurboniev, A. ‘Between Manuscripts and Digital Texts: Commentaries on Hadith 
Raʾs al-Jalut.’ https://kitab-project.org/Between-Manuscripts-and-Digital-Texts-
Commentaries-on-Hadith-Ra%CA%BEs-al-Jalut/, accessed 13 January 2021.

 Romanov, Maxim. ‘OpenITI mARkdown.’ https://maximromanov.github.io/
mARkdown/, accessed 13 January 2021.
Romanov, Maxim, Matthew Thomas Miller, Sarah Bowen Savant and Masoumeh 
Seydi. ‘Open Islamicate Texts Initiative: A Machine-Readable Corpus of Texts 
Produced in the Premodern Islamicate World (Poster).’ In Digital Humanities 
2019 Conference Papers: Book of Abstracts. Utrecht: Utrecht University, 2019. 
https://dev.clariah.nl/files/dh2019/boa/0838.html, accessed 4 January 2022.
Sahner, C. C. ‘A Zoroastrian Dispute in the Caliph’s Court: The Gizistag Abāliš in 
its Early Islamic Context.’ Iranian Studies 52, nos. 1–2 (2019): 61–83.
Savant, S. B. ‘A Tale of Three “Versions”: Measuring Variation in the Early Arabic 
Tradition.’ Kitab Project (2017): https://kitab-project.org/A-Tale-of-3-Ver-
sions/, accessed 26 June 2020.
Sinai, N. ‘Die klassische islamische Koranexegese: Eine Annäherung.’ Theologische 
Literaturzeitung 136 (2011): 123–134. 
Syed, M. ‘An Experiment in Natural Language Processing, Machine Learning, and 
Islamic Law.’ Islamic Law Blog (2020): https://islamiclaw.blog/2020/06/02/an- 
experiment-in-natural-language-processing-machine-learning-and-islamic-
law-part-1/, accessed 31 July 2020. 
Syed, M., Danny Halawi, Behnam Sadeghi and Nazmus Saquib. ‘Verifying Source 
Citations in the Hadith Literature.’ Journal of Medieval Worlds 1 no. 3 (2019): 
5–20.
al-Ṭihrānī, Aghā Buzurg. al-Dharīʿa ilā taṣānīf al-Shīʿa. 25 vols. Beirut: Dār al-Aḍwāʾ, 
1403/1983.
Tokatly, V. ‘The Aʿlām al-ḥadīth of al-Khaṭṭābī: A Commentary on al-Bukhārī’s 
Ṣaḥīḥ or a Polemical Treatise?’ Studia Islamica 92 (2001): 53–91.
Van Den Bossche, G. ‘On Commentaries, Digressions, Transtextualities, and Rabbit 
Holes.’ Kitab Project (2019). <https://kitab-project.org/On-Commentaries,-
Digressions,-Transtextualities,-and-Rabbit-Holes>, accessed 13 January 2021.
van Lit, L. W. C. ‘Commentary and Commentary Tradition: The Basic Terms for 
Understanding Islamic Intellectual History.’ Mélanges de l’institut dominicain 
des études orientales 32 (2017): 3–26.
Wasserstein, D. J. ‘The “Majlis of al-Riḍā”: A Religious Debate in the Court of 
the Caliph al-Maʾmūn as Represented in a Shīʿī Hagiographical Work about 
the Eighth Imām ʿAlī ibn Mūsā al-Riḍā.’ In H. Lazarus-Yafeh et al. (eds), The 
Majlis: Interreligious Encounters in Medieval Islam, pp. 108–119. Wiesbaden: 
Harrassowitz Verlag, 1999.
Wasserstrom, S. M. Between Muslim and Jew: The Problem of Symbiosis Under 
Early Islam. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1995.
280 
BEDNARKIEWICZ, QURBONIEV AND VAN DEN BOSSCHE

 Afterword 
More Comments, Further Questions
Joel Blecher
The preceding chapters have presented rich illustrations of continuity and 
change in the hadith commentary tradition across sectarian divisions and 
genres, over a period dating back more than a millennium and spanning a 
region from the Mediterranean littoral to Persia and India. Before mapping 
out some future directions for the field, I first discuss one final example I 
encountered recently that aptly captures this interplay between continuity 
and change in the tradition of hadith commentary.
Tucked away in the Ambrosiana Library in Milan is, at first glance, an 
unremarkable manuscript of Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī. It was originally copied 
in 827/1424, during the very heyday of Mamlūk-era commentaries on 
hadith. And yet in the margins of this text we find notes from four separate 
hands. These reflect the practices of scholarly communities from the ninth/
fifteenth, tenth/sixteenth, twelfth/eighteenth, and nineteenth centuries (see 
Figure A.1).1 These readers, though separated by long stretches of time, 
nevertheless returned to the margins of these delicate pages, to this very 
same paper, ink and glue to recite the text aloud, add their corrections and 
offer novel comments on the sayings of Muhammad. In places throughout 
this manuscript, these various marginal comments from different eras 
and places intertwine, with the notes of the twelfth-/eighteenth-century 
reader decorating either side of those of their tenth-/sixteenth-century 
predecessors.2
 1 Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī, Bibliotheca Ambrosiana, MS D347 fol. 251. The first hand records a 
series of hadith sessions (majālis) that ended on a Thursday during the fall of 891/1486; 
the second hand, which preserved the most detailed marginal notes, concluded dur-
ing Ramadan in 964/1556; a third annotated reading occurred during Ramadan in 
1192/1778. The fourth hand is described below.
 2 Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī, Bibliotheca Ambrosiana, MS D 347, fol. 54a. 

 282 
JOEL BLECHER
Figure A.1 Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī, Bibliotheca Ambrosiana, MS D 347, fol. 
251b, dated 827/1424. The first annotation (right of centre) records a series 
of hadith sessions (majālis) that concluded Thursday, 12 Dhū al-Qaʿda 
891/9 November 1486; the second annotation (left of centre) concluded 
during Ramadan 964/1556; a third annotation (centre) reading occurred 
during Ramadan 1192/1778; a fourth annotation (below centre) is that 
of al-Shawkānī’s student, who dated the reading to Ramadan 1248/1833. 
Photo © Veneranda Biblioteca Ambrosiana.

  
AFTERWORD 
283
The most modern hand to have read and annotated the text is the spar-
est, but also the most intriguing. This layer of commentary is attributed 
to a student who testified that, during Ramadan, he heard the text from 
the lips of the ageing iconoclastic hadith scholar from Yemen, Muḥammad 
al-Shawkānī, a year or so before al-Shawkānī’s death in 1248/1833.3 
Al-Shawkānī was best known for his barbed commentaries and his call to 
revive bold methods of interpretation that mandated a direct interface with 
the hadith, a view that challenged the entrenched orthodoxies undergird-
ing Islamic legal institutions in the nineteenth century.4 And yet the peri-
odic annotations preserved in this volume and attributed to al-Shawkānī 
are somewhat mundane. For instance, al-Shawkānī typically paused his 
student’s recitation to ask that the student note that a variant of a hadith 
might be found in another section of Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī. 
In the following Ramadan, of 1249/1834, just months from al-Shawkānī’s 
impending death, the student returned to al-Shawkānī to hear the second 
volume of this same ninth-/fifteenth-century copy of Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī read 
aloud. Several times al-Shawkānī struggled to sign his name at the end of 
the manuscript – the ink failed him twice. On the third try, al-Shawkānī 
succeeded in stating clearly: ‘In the name of God, the most compassionate, 
most merciful. This is correct. Signed by Muḥammad b. ʿAlī al-Shawkānī, 
God grant us forgiveness’ (see Figure A.2).5 As the final Ramadan of 
al-Shawkānī’s life elapsed, this is the only comment he offered his student 
on this volume of the text. 
Examining the manuscript on this scale, that is, at the instant when 
al-Shawkānī struggled to put ink to the manuscript’s paper, and his grow-
ing reticence as he approached his own death – underscores that the simple 
embodied presence of the master and the physical labour he performed 
was susceptible to interruption, and these changes – however minute – set 
the very conditions for the practice of interpreting hadith. 
And yet, at the broadest scale of time – the four hundred years of com-
mentary this manuscript was subjected to – the list of political, social and 
economic upheavals that transformed the world was likewise dramatic: 
trans-oceanic mobility expanded, a global economic order dominated by 
Western European powers ascended, and print culture and literacy rose 
and spread, among many other phenomena. And yet readers of hadith who 
spanned these disparate temporal, cultural, political and economic orders 
returned to this text – indeed, to this very same manuscript – to employ 
 3 Al-Shawkānī’s student’s name was Ṣāliḥ b. Muḥammad b. ʿAbdallāh al-ʿAinsī (later 
Ṣanʿānī). Al-Shawkānī affirms in his biographical dictionary that the student heard 
Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī from him; al-Shawkānī Badr al-ṭāliʿ, 199.
 4 Haykel, Revival and Reform in Islam, 234.
 5 Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī, Bibliotheca Ambrosiana, MS D 348, fol. 222b.

 Figure A.2 Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī, Bibliotheca Ambrosiana, MS D 348, fol. 
222b. Al-Shawkānī’s two failed attempts to sign his name are evident, but 
the third attempt (upper left) al-Shawkānī succeeded in writing: ‘In the 
name of God, the most compassionate, most merciful. This is correct. 
Signed by Muḥammad b. ʿAlī al-Shawkānī, God grant us forgiveness’. 
Photo © Veneranda Biblioteca Ambrosiana.
284 
JOEL BLECHER

  
AFTERWORD 
285
shared practices of reading and interpretation, even as they sought to high-
light different facets of the text’s meaning. As a physical artefact, this manu-
script offers us, as many examples in the preceding chapters of this book 
do, a profound lesson about the interplay of continuity and change that 
emerged in and across the centuries spent continuously reading and inter-
preting this book, in weekly sessions, over months, years, centuries, even a 
millennium and longer.
By bringing together diverse studies that cover an array of places and 
times, this volume opens new perspectives from which to explore and 
analyse continuity and change in the history of hadith commentary. This 
volume has taken us on a whirlwind tour from the caliph al-Maʾmūn in 
third-/ninth-century Khurāsān, to the networks of Sunnī and Shīʿī scholars 
from al-Andalus to Iraq in the fifth/eleventh century, to the Mamlūk and 
Tīmūrid-era thinkers of Egypt, Syria, and Iran in the seventh/thirteenth to 
ninth/fifteenth centuries, to the Shīʿī scholars of Ṣafavid Persia during the 
tenth/sixteenth to the twelfth/eighteenth centuries, to the modern Mus-
lim scholars of nineteenth- and twentieth-century Turkey, Iran and India. 
In many cases, these contributions represent the first sustained scholarly 
engagement with the culture and tradition of hadith commentary in these 
places, times, disciplines and texts. In this regard, this volume opens the 
known universe of hadith commentary very wide indeed. While these case 
studies reveal many differences, we can also begin to identify numerous 
patterns of continuity in interpretive techniques, scholarly practices, intel-
lectual debates, religious aims and adherence to certain discursive rules, 
and in the contexts of various social and political spaces. 
Still, our map of the field, as wide as it is in scope, remains incom-
plete, at least in terms of places and periods that have yet to be explored. 
Deeper research into the thriving communities of hadith commentators 
of al-Andalus and North Africa must be undertaken.6 Ethnographies that 
document and analyse contemporary practices and live sessions of had-
ith commentaries are needed in general, but particularly in contemporary 
Malaysia and Indonesia. This requires research into commentaries proper 
as well as translation as a form of commentary, a preliminary task that 
Mark Woodward laid the groundwork for nearly thirty years ago.7 Schol-
ars may also be able to cull evidence of commentary on hadith from the 
earliest surviving Islamic texts from the Indo-Malay world (some of which  
were handbooks on ethics), and from anthologies that contained hadith 
 6 The recent work of Khaoula Trad and Ömercan Kaçar in this area is most welcome. 
Trad, ‘The Impact of Maghribi Ḥadīth Commentaries on the Mashriq’ and Kaçar, 
‘Muhallab b. Abī Ṣufra and His Method of Ḥadīth Commentary.’ See also Blecher, Said 
the Prophet of God, 19–46.
 7 Woodward, ‘Textual Exegesis as Social Commentary’, 565–583.

 translated into Javanese and Malay for local audiences who were encoun-
tering Islamic traditions for the first time in the ninth/fifteenth, tenth/
sixteenth and eleventh/seventeenth centuries.8 While Deobandī contribu-
tions to hadith commentary in South Asia are addressed in this volume and 
elsewhere, we do not know enough of the commentarial literature circulat-
ing among Deobandī scholars of South Africa.9 Moreover, studies of hadith 
commentaries in Nigeria and other parts of sub-Saharan Africa have yet to 
be undertaken. 
Scholars of Islam in America may also seek to collect and analyse mod-
ern American forms of hadith commentary, such as those circulating online 
or those in CD format in storefront mosques in Philadelphia, East Orange, 
Toronto and other cities across North America. In these contexts, we might 
ask whether the commentary tradition offers a forum for mediating ques-
tions of race, identity and political agency.10 Practices of hadith commentary 
are likewise thriving in Muslim communities across the United Kingdom 
and Europe; certainly recordings and live sessions of these meetings would 
also be ripe for fresh analyses and ethnographic studies.
There is, lastly, the question of how non-Muslim cultures translated, 
recompiled and interpreted hadith. The recent study of a tenth-/sixteenth-
century Arabic to Judaeo-Arabic translation of a collection of maxims that 
includes prophetic hadith suggests ‘the strong attraction that this literature 
held for non-Muslim readers, in this case Karaite Jews’.11 The translation 
itself could be studied as a form of hadith commentary. While rare, this dis-
covery suggests that there may be more of this kind of literature, and that 
scholars of Jewish studies may also contribute to this field. Future stud-
ies of Anglo-Muhammadan Law and early Dutch attempts to translate the 
Islamic legal corpus may lead to further insights into the interpretation of 
hadith literature outside the Islamic tradition.12 Moreover, placing early 
Orientalist and philological translations and interpretations of hadith in 
the Western academy (notably the work of Ignác Goldziher, Gustav Weil 
and more recently G. H. A. Juynboll) in the comparative context of other 
non-Muslim audiences of hadith may likewise help us better understand 
the state of the field and question the assumptions that have shaped our 
own enquiries.
 8 Drewes, Een Javaanse Primbon; also see Abdul Majid et al., ‘Hadith Written in Early Islam 
[the] Malay Region’; this is an analysis of a commentary and translation of al-Nawawī’s 
Arbaʿīn in Malay by an eleventh-/seventeenth-century scholar named ʿAbd al-Raʾūf al-Jāwī 
al-Sinkilī.
 9 On Deobandī networks in South Africa, see Ingraham, Revival from Below.
10 Blecher and Dubler, ‘Overlooking Race and Secularism in Muslim Philadelphia’,  
122–150.
11 Fenton, ‘K. ad-Durr al-Manzûm’. 
12 Kooria, ‘The Dutch Mogharaer’, and Kugle, ‘Framed, Blamed and Renamed’.
286 
JOEL BLECHER

  
AFTERWORD 
287
Our goal must not simply be to analyse hadith commentaries from dis-
parate parts of the world, but to examine in depth the way in which had-
ith commentary relates to audiences entangled in local and global social, 
political and economic contexts. In understanding how power, tradition 
and experience are woven together in the form of the commentary, future 
studies could offer readers a three-dimensional view of this practice that is 
too often flattened within the folios of a manuscript or constrained to the 
four corners of a printed page.
This volume largely draws on print sources as evidence, although future 
researchers, taking their cue from Gunasti’s study of a Turkish translation 
of Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī, may seek to shed greater light on the intersection of 
hadith commentary and the politics of print culture itself.13 Likewise, there 
is much more to be understood about the production, transmission and 
reception of hadith commentary in manuscript culture. Early analyses of 
manuscript revisions and drafts of works offer insight into the craft of had-
ith commentary, but many more sit on library shelves waiting patiently for 
a curious researcher to examine them.14 Such is the case with al-Zarkashī’s 
autographed draft of his Tanqīh, a well-known commentary on Ṣaḥīḥ 
al-Bukhārī, heavily marked with his edits and revisions (see Figure A.3).15 
Commentaries that are transmitted in the form of new media likewise 
offer novel archives for researchers. These include book stores and street 
vendors that sell hadith commentary on cassette tapes, DVDs and CDs; 
networks of websites that stream audio and video commentaries on had-
ith; and the robust archive of hadith commentary already present on social 
media. To what extent do these novel forms of media attract new audi-
ences, and in doing so reshape the scope and effect of the commentary that 
they convey? How do these various media, in comparison to manuscripts 
and print works, shape the form of commentaries? And what patterns of 
continuity and change can be found in these different forms? 
This book breaks new ground (in the chapters by Aghaei, Rizvi, and 
Nafisi) by examining Shīʿī hadith commentaries for the first time. As fur-
ther elaboration of these particular intellectual traditions continues, I 
invite future researchers to undertake comparative studies that examine 
continuities and differences in the reception of hadith literature as they 
are glossed and interpreted across sectarian lines.16 Likewise, this volume  
also examines hadith commentary in multiple genres and disciplines 
13 See also Zaman, ‘Commentaries, Print and Patronage’, and El Shamsy, Rediscovering 
the Islamic Classics.
14 Blecher, ‘Revision in the Manuscript Age’.
15 Al-Zarkashī, Tanqīḥ Alfāẓ al-Jāmiʿ al-Ṣaḥīḥ, Orientabteilung, Sprenger 499, fol. 22a. 
16 Pamela Klasova’s recent study of the ‘Creation of the Intellect’ hadith across sectarian 
lines explores the literary dimension of hadith commentary. Klasova, ‘Ḥadīth as Common  
Discourse’. 

 Figure A.3 A folio from al-Zarkashī’s commentary on Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī 
in the author’s own hand. Cancellations with marginal and interlineal 
insertions and even some marginal cancellations illustrate the writing 
and revision process of what later became a well-known and widely circu-
lated hadith commentary. See al-Zarkashī, Tanqīḥ Alfāẓ al-Jāmiʿ al-Ṣaḥīḥ,  
Orientabteilung, Sprenger 499, fol. 22a.
288 
JOEL BLECHER

  
AFTERWORD 
289
of knowledge: philology (Brinkmann), theology (Patel), law (Gunasti, 
Gharaibeh, and Mian), Sufism (Dajani), isnād criticism (Aghaei) and 
tafsīr (Nafisi). Preliminary studies of hadith commentary in the genre of 
prophetic medicine, published elsewhere, likewise pave the way for future 
researchers to build comparative studies of the practice of hadith com-
mentary across genres and disciplines of knowledge.17 To put it more gen-
erally, the field still needs comparisons of commentary on hadith in legal 
versus medical works, as well as studies comparing hadith commentary 
with Qur’an commentary. 
Such comparative studies of hadith commentary would enable research-
ers to explore broader questions of hermeneutics across the Islamic sciences 
and in the humanities. This requires not only comparing the reception of 
hadith across genres and disciplines of knowledge, but also comparing pat-
terns of interpretation between hadith commentary and other commentary 
traditions in which hadith are not the central focus. How might studies 
of hadith commentary contribute to conversations across the humanities 
about the interpretation of scriptures, canonical works and foundational 
philosophical and political documents?18 And what might studies of had-
ith commentary teach scholars of hermeneutics working in other, more 
mature fields of Islamic studies, or those in the rapidly growing academic 
studies of uṣūl al-fiqh and tafsīr?19 Alternatively, what might students of 
hadith commentary learn from the insights and methods used in these 
fields in Islamic studies? For example, in the present volume Samer Dajani 
uses existing debates in the category of ‘Sufi tafsīr’ to help us make sense of 
the category of Sufi hadith commentary. Future collaborations across these 
subfields and disciples are bound to yield further insights. 
The coming decade will only increase the innovative forms of digi-
tal analyses that open researchers’ eyes to distant reading, a big-data 
analytical approach that complements the traditional ‘close reading’ of 
the philologically inclined. This includes analyses of ‘digital text reuse’ 
(how commentaries quote and reuse the texts of their predecessors in 
the tradition) highlighted in our volume’s final chapter (Bednarkiewicz, 
Qurboniev and Van Den Bossche) but also leaves room for the kinds of 
methods from the digital humanities that are being practised and devel-
oped elsewhere.20 The material is also ripe for social network analyses  
17 Stearns, Infectious Ideas; Eich, ‘Patterns in the History of the Commentation’.
18 In addition to the foundational works of theorists such as Schleiermacher, Gadamer 
and Ricouer, researchers of hadith commentary should be encouraged to engage with 
comparative volumes such as those by Henderson, Scripture, Canon, and Commentary; 
Cabezón, Scholasticism; and Pelikan, Interpreting the Bible & the Constitution.
19 Keeler, Sufi Hermeneutics; Lowry, ‘The Legal Hermeneutics’; Vishanoff, The Formation 
of Islamic Hermeneutics.
20 Muhanna, The Digital Humanities; Eich, ‘Patterns in the History of the Commentation’.

 of hadith commentators themselves. The very aspect of hadith commen-
tary that has proven to be the greatest barrier for so long – its volumi-
nousness – may yet prove to be its greatest asset.
Finally, it is paramount that we make progress on our understand-
ing of women, gender and sexuality in this tradition. In her ethnographic 
work, Saba Mahmood has briefly explored women’s pedagogy concerning 
the interpretation of hadith.21 In an earlier publication, our contributor 
Ali Altaf Mian has opened the door for inquiry into the intersection of 
the erotic and hadith culture.22 We hope the field builds on these stud-
ies by offering a critical-theoretical framework for analysing the schol-
arly networks dominated by male commentators, even as women were 
important transmitters of hadith at certain historical moments, especially 
in the first Islamic century, in the Ḥanbalī communities of Mamlūk-era 
Damascus, and once again in the contemporary era.23 Here our volume’s 
ambitious scope falls short, but I will conclude with a series of questions 
that I hope will stimulate future research in this still nascent dimension of 
the field. To what extent were the earliest transmitters of hadith, such as 
ʿĀʾisha, Umm Salama and others, also positioned as the interpreters of the 
very matn of the hadith text? What can we learn about the questions and 
modes of clarification attributed to them? How did later hadith commen-
tators discuss women and women’s issues? Does the extent of women’s 
participation in hadith transmission in certain eras alter the scope of com-
mentary? We know that women transmitters of hadith compiled digests 
and collections of ‘forty hadith’ – can a ‘hermeneutics of compilation’ be 
discerned in their works? What about women religious authorities in the 
modern world – what continuities and differences emerge in the way they 
approach the commentary of hadith?24 And might hadith commentar-
ies resolve problems of grave import to the trans and gender non-binary 
community?25 And to what extent do these hadith commentaries serve  
as a forum for the performance of masculinity and the construction of 
male virtue? 
In writing Said the Prophet of God in 2018, I had only intended to unlock 
the door to future studies of this tradition. When Stefanie Brinkmann and 
21 Mahmood, Politics of Piety, 79–117.
22 Mian, ‘Genres of Desire’.
23 Studies in this area should begin with Sayeed, Women and the Transmission of Knowl-
edge in Islam; Geissinger, ‘The Portrayal of the Ḥajj’; Nadwī, al-Muḥaddithāt.
24 Nuṣrat Amīn (1308–1423/1886 or 1887–1983), for instance, a well-known and well-
respected mujtahida in twentieth-century Shīʿī Iran, is remembered for her Arbaʿīn 
al-hāshimiyya (published in 1931), in which she collected and commented on forty 
hadith and their lines of transmission; see Rutner, ‘Religious Authority’.
25 For a range of hadiths that address these matters, see Kugle, Islam and Homosexuality.
290 
JOEL BLECHER

  
AFTERWORD 
291
Ali Zaherinezhad first told me of a workshop on hadith commentaries that 
they were organising at the University of Hamburg, I was delighted, and 
saw an opportunity to help shape the contours of future studies – to help 
others open the door and cross the threshold, so to speak. But as my after-
word points out, our scholarly conversation has only just begun. Through 
the tireless efforts of my co-editor Stefanie Brinkmann and the inspira-
tion of our colleague Ali Zaherinezhad, as well as the learned and original 
insights of our contributors from Gainesville to Exeter to Berlin to Tehran, 
our volume seeks not only to shed light on the patterns of continuity and 
change in the hadith commentary tradition, but also to lay the groundwork 
for other scholars with new voices and concerns to step into the foyer, and 
enter the garden beyond.
Bibliography
Abdul Majid, Latifah, Haziyah Husain, Mazlan Ibrahim, and Jawiah Dakir.  
‘Hadith Written in Early Islam in the Malay Region.’ Advances in Natural and 
Applied Sciences 6, no. 3 (2012): 472–477.
al-Bukhārī, Muḥammad ibn Ismāʿīl. Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī. Milan, Bibliotheca Ambro-
siana, MS. D 347 ar.
Blecher, Joel. ‘Revision in the Manuscript Age: New Evidence of Early Versions 
of Ibn Ḥajar’s Fatḥ al-Bārī.’ Journal of Near Eastern Studies 76, no. 1 (2017): 
39–51.
Blecher, Joel. Said the Prophet of God: Hadith Commentary Across a Millenium. 
Oakland: University of California Press, 2018.
Blecher, Joel and Josh Dubler. ‘Overlooking Race and Secularism in Muslim Phila-
delphia.’ In Vincent Lloyd and Jonathan S. Kahn (eds), Race and Secularism in 
America, pp. 122–150. New York: Columbia University Press, 2016.
Cabezón, José. Scholasticism: Cross-Cultural and Comparative Perspectives. Albany: 
State University of New York Press, 1998.
Drewes, G. W. J. Een Javaanse Primbon Uit De Zestiende Eeuw. Leiden: Brill, 1954.
Eich, Thomas. ‘Patterns in the History of the Commentation on the So-Called 
Ḥadīth Ibn Masʿūd.’ Journal of Arabic and Islamic Studies 18 (2018): 137–162.
El Shamsy, Ahmed. Rediscovering the Islamic Classics: How Editors and Print 
Culture Transformed an Intellectual Tradition. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univer-
sity Press, 2020.
Fenton, Paul. ‘K. ad-Durr al-Manzûm: A Sufi Collection of Moral Aphorism in 
Judaeo-Arabic.’ In Naoya Katsumata and Wout van Bekkum, Giving a Dia-
mond: Essays in Honor of Joseph Yahalom on the Occasion of His Seventieth 
Birthday, pp. 213–242. Leiden: Brill, 2011. doi: <https://doi.org/10.1163/
ej.9789004203815.i-328.57>. 
Geissinger, Aisha. ‘The Portrayal of the Ḥajj as a Context for Women’s Exegesis: 
Textual Evidence from al-Bukhārī’s (d. 870) Ṣaḥīḥ.’ In Sebastian Günther (ed.), 
Ideas, Images, and Methods of Portrayal: Insights into Classical Arabic Literature 
and Islam, pp. 153–179. Leiden and Boston: Brill, 2005.

 Haykel, Bernard. Revival and Reform in Islam: The Legacy of Muhammad 
al-Shawkānī. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Henderson, John. Scripture, Canon, and Commentary. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1991.
Ingraham, Brendan. Revival from Below: The Deoband Movement and Global 
Islam. Oakland: University of California Press, 2018.
Kaçar, Ömercan. ‘Muhallab B. Abī Ṣufra and His Method of Ḥadīth Commentary.’ 
MA Thesis, Marmara University, 2021.
Keeler, Annabel. Sufi Hermeneutics: The Qur’an Commentary of Rashīd al-Dīn 
Maybudī. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017.
Klasova, Pamela. ‘Ḥadīth as Common Discourse: Reflections on the Intersectarian 
Dissemination of the Creation of the Intellect Tradition.’ al-ʿUṣūr al-Wusṭā 28 
(2020): 297–345.
Kooria, Mahmood. ‘The Dutch Mogharaer, Arabic Muḥarrar, and Javanese Law 
Books: A VOC Experiment with Muslim Law in Java, 1747–1767.’ Itinerario, 
European Journal of Overseas History (2018): 202–219.
Kugle, Scott. ‘Framed, Blamed and Renamed: The Recasting of Islamic Jurispru-
dence in Colonial South Asia.’ Modern Asian Studies 35, no. 2 (2001): 257–313.
Kugle, Scott. Islam and Homosexuality: Critical Reflection on Gay, Lesbian, and 
Transgender Muslims. London: Oneworld, 2010.
Lowry, Joseph. ‘The Legal Hermeneutics of al-Shāfiʿī and Ibn Qutayba: A Recon-
sideration.’ Islamic Law and Society 11, no. 1 (2004): 1–41.
Mahmood, Saba. Politics of Piety: The Islamic Revival and the Feminist Subject. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2005.
Mian, Ali Altaf. ‘Genres of Desire: The Erotic in Deobandī Islam.’ History of Religions 
59, no. 2 (2019): 108–145.
Muhanna, Elias. The Digital Humanities and Islamic & Middle East Studies. Berlin: 
DeGruyter, 2016.
Nadwī, Muhammad Akram. al-Muḥaddithāt: The Women Scholars in Islam. 
Oxford: Interface Publications, 2016.
Pelikan, Jaroslav. Interpreting the Bible & the Constitution. New Haven: Yale  
University Press, 2004.
Rutner, Maryam. ‘Religious Authority, Gendered Recognition, and Instrumen-
talization of Nusrat Amin in Life and after Death.’ Journal of Middle East  
Womens Studies 11, no. 1 (2015): 24–41.
Sayeed, Asma. Women and the Transmission of Knowledge in Islam. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2013.
al-Shawkānī, Muḥammad. Badr al-ṭāliʿ bi-maḥāsin man baʿd al-qarn al-sābiʿ. Beirut: 
Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyya, 1998.
Stearns, Justin. Infectious Ideas: Contagion in Premodern Islamic and Christian 
Thought in the Western Mediterranean. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins Uni-
versity Press, 2011.
Trad, Khaoula. ‘The Impact of Maghribi Ḥadīth Commentaries on the Mashriq.’ In 
Maribel Fierro and Mayte Penelas (eds), The Maghrib in the Mashriq: Knowl-
edge, Travel and Identity, pp. 213–236. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2021. doi: <https://
doi.org/10.1515/9783110713305-008>. 
292 
JOEL BLECHER

  
AFTERWORD 
293
Vishanoff, David. The Formation of Islamic Hermeneutics: How Sunni Legal Theo-
rists Imagined a Revealed Law. New Haven: American Oriental Society, 2011.
Woodward, Mark R. ‘Textual Exegesis as Social Commentary: Religious, Social, 
and Political Meanings of Indonesian Translations of Arabic Ḥadīth Texts.’ 
Journal of Asian Studies 52, no. 3 (1993): 565–583.
Zaman, Muhammad Qasim. ‘Commentaries, Print and Patronage, “Ḥadīth” and 
the Madrasas in Modern South Asia.’ Bulletin of the School of Oriental and 
African Studies 62, no. 1 (1999): 60–81.
al-Zarkashī, Badr al-Dīn. Tanqīḥ Alfāẓ al-Jāmiʿ al-Ṣaḥīḥ. Berlin, Staatsbibliothek, 
Orientabteilung, Sprenger 499, fol. 22a.

 Index
The article ‘al-’, diacritics, the letters ʿayn and hamza  as well as ‘b’ are disregarded 
in the alphabetical order
The letter f following an entry indicates a page with a figure
ʿAbbās, Iḥsān, 98
ʿAbd Allāh ibn Muḥammad Shinshawrī, 6n 
ʿAbd al-Ghāfir al-Fārisī, 28, 29n
ʿAbd al-Laṭīf al-Baghdādī, 30, 32
ʿAbd al-Malik b. Ḥabīb al-Qurṭubī, 27, 30, 40
ʿAbd al-Qāhir al-Suhrawardī, 6n, 24, 28, 30
ʿAbd al-Raḥmān b. Ibrāhīm (Duhaym), 87
ʿAbd al-Raḥmān Mubārakpūrī (al-
Mubārakfūrī), 226–8, 229
ʿAbd al-Raʾūf al-Munāwī, 122
ʿAbd al-Wahhāb al-Shaʿrānī, 121, 224
ʿAbdallāh al-Anṣārī, 118
ʿAbdallāh b. Masʿūd, 86, 226–8
ʿAbdallāh b. al-Mubārak, 105
ʿAbdallāh b. ʿUmar, 86, 226, 227
ʿAbduh, Muḥammad, 271
Abū al-ʿAbbās Aḥmad b. Yaḥyā Thaʿlab, 27
Abū al-ʿAbbās al-Mursī, 97–8
Abū ʿAbd al-Raḥmān al-Sulamī, 114–15, 117
Abū ʿAbdallāh Muḥammad b. Ismāʿīl.  
al-Bukhārī, 117, 128n, 142, 223 
Diyanet translation project, 188, 189
Kāndhalawī, Muḥammad Zakariyyā, 217
Ottoman hadith study, 191, 192
see also Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī
Abū ʿAbdallāh al-Qazwīnī Ibn Mājah, 86, 89n
Abū ʿAdnān ʿAbd al-Raḥmān b. ʿAbd al-Aʿlā 
al-Sulamī, 22
Abū Aḥmad al-Ḥusayn b. Mūsā, 52
Abū ʿAmr Isḥāq al-Shaybānī, 27
Abū ʿAmr ʿUthmān b. al-Ṣalāḥ, 139, 141, 147
Abū Bakr b. Abī Shayba, 87
Abū Bakr al-Ājurrī, 91–5, 97, 98, 99
Abū Bakr b. al-ʿArabī, 220
Abū Bakr al-Bayhaqī, 143
Abū Bakr al-Kalābādhī, 116, 118, 124–5
Abū Dāwūd al-Sijistānī, 112–13, 114, 115, 
127–8, 216
Abū Dharr al-Ghifārī, 71
Abū al-Faraj ʿAbd al-Raḥmān Ibn al-Jawzī, 
136
Abū Ḥafṣ ʿAlī b. al-Mulaqqin al-Anṣārī, 138
Abū Ḥāmid al-Ghazālī, 95, 101, 104, 118
Abū Ḥanīfa, 202, 203, 205, 225, 229
Abū al-Ḥasan ʿAlī b. (Aḥmad) b. Ismāʿīl b. 
Sīda, 19
Abū al-Ḥasan ʿAlī Nadwī, 231
Abū Ḥātim al-ʿAṭṭār, school of, 113–14
ʿAbd al-Ḥayy Laknawī, 202
Abū Ḥayyān al-Tawḥīdī, 80, 99
Abū Hurayra, 86, 87
Abū al-Ḥusayn Muḥammad b. Abī al-Yaʿlā, 
136
Abū al-Ḥusayn Muḥammad b. al-Qāsim, 156
Abū ʿĪsa al-Tirmidhī, 86, 136, 192, 220, 226–7
Abū Isḥāq al-Ḥarbī, 23, 35, 38–9
Abū Isḥāq al-Shāṭibī, 95–6, 99, 100, 102–3, 
104
Abū Jaʿfar al-Kulaynī, 159–60; see also al-Kāfī
Abū Jaʿfar al-Ṭaḥāwī, 216, 224, 227
Abū Jaʿfar al-Ṭūsī, 152, 158, 162, 242–3 
Abū Manṣūr Maʿmar al-Iṣfahānī, 117
Abū Muḥammad ʿAbdallāh b. Durustawayh, 
28

  
INDEX 
295
Abū Muḥammad al-Dārimī, 7n, 86
Abū Muḥammad Qāsim b. Thābit al-
Saraqusṭī, 23, 28, 31, 35
Abū Nuʿaym al-Iṣfahānī, 114
Abū al-Qāsim ʿAlī b. ʿAsākir, 142
Abū al-Qāsim Thābit, 23, 28, 31
Abū Saʿīd b. al-Aʿrābī, 114, 115
Abū Sulaymān al-Khaṭṭābī, 22, 23, 27, 28, 
35, 115
Abū Ṭāhir Aḥmad al-Silafī, 113, 142
Abū Ṭālib al-Makkī, 101
Abū ʿUbayd Aḥmad al-Harawī, 23, 28, 41
Abū ʿUbayd al-Qāsim b. Sallām, 6n, 19, 20, 
22, 23, 27–8, 35, 36, 39
alcoholic beverages, 36–8
criticism, 41
poverty, 63
vessels, 37–8
Abū ʿUbayda Maʿmar b. al-Muthannā, 22–3, 
27
Abū al-Walīd al-Bājī, 210
Abū al-Waqt al-Sijzī al-Ṣūfī, 114
Abū Yaʿla al-Mawṣīlī, 89n
Abū Zakariyyā Yaḥyā al-Nawawī, 126, 133; 
see also al-Arbaʿīn 
Abū’l A‘la Mawdūdī, 229
adab (propriety), 116, 120
Africa, 285, 286
afterlife, punishment in the, 66–7
al-aḥādith al-qudsiyya (ʿAlī al-Qārī), 194 
ahl al-bayt (People of the House), 245, 248–9, 
253, 254, 255, 256, 257
ahl al-dhikr (people of remembrance; 
Imams), 254, 255–6
Ahl al-Ḥadīth, the, 113–15, 207, 208, 212, 
219, 228, 229
prayer, raising the hands in, 226
Aḥmad b. Aḥmad al-Zabīdī, 190, 193, 195, 197 
Aḥmad b. ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib al-Ṭabrisī, 161
Aḥmad al-Anṣārī, 19
Aḥmad al-Barqī, 158
Aḥmad b. Ḥanbal, 86, 143, 145–7, 148, 223
Aḥmad al-Ishbīlī, 144
Aḥmad b. Muḥammad al-Barqī, 152
Aḥmad b. Muḥammad al-Qudūrī, 34
Aḥmad al-Qasṭallānī, 274–5
Aḥmad al-Rifāʿī, 117 
akhbār (reports), 50–1 
khabar mutawātir (concurrent report), 50, 
51, 55, 58
see also akhbār al-āḥād
akhbār al-āḥād (single, isolated traditions), 
50–1, 54 
authority of, 245–8, 257
hermeneutical tools for interpreting, 
62–73
al-Sharīf al-Murtaḍā, interpreting, 58–62, 
74
al-Sharīf al-Murtaḍā, rejecting, 54–8, 73
Akhbārī commentaries, 150
Akif, Mehmet, 188, 190, 194n
ʿAlāʾ al-Dawla al-Simnānī, 119–20
Alasonyalı Ali Zeynelabidin Efendi, 192
alcoholic beverages, 36–8, 39–40, 41–2
ʿAlī b. ʿAbd al-Malik al-Hindī al-Muttaqī,  
22
ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib, 72, 100, 154–5, 227, 249, 
253–4, 256 
Dīwān, 154
Nahj al-balāgha, 52, 96, 153–4, 267, 
271–2, 275
ʿAlī al-Ḥafīsha, 42
ʿAlī b. al-Ḥasan Zavārī Iṣfahānī, 154
ʿAlī al-Hindī, 34
ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn Zayn al-ʿĀbidīn, 153, 156–7
ʿAlī al-Karakī, 156
ʿAlī b. Mūsā al-Riḍā, 155–6, 266
ʿAlī al-Muttaqī al-Hindī, 34
ʿAlī al-Qārī, 194, 197, 202
ʿAlī al-Riḍā, 155–6
Alkaoud, M. 269
ʿAllūsh, ʿAbd al-Sallām Muḥammad, 22
Amālī al-Murtaḍā (al-Sharīf al-Murtaḍā), 51, 
58, 59, 62 
al-Amam, (al-Kūranī), 119
America, 286
Anas b. Malik, 86
al-Andalus, 30–1
annihilation, 217
Anwār al-faṣāḥa wa-asrār al-barāʾa fī sharḥ 
Nahj al-balāgha (Niẓām al-Dīn Gīlānī), 
154
apocalypticism, 82, 84–5, 89, 91, 99–100
ʿaql (intellect; reason) see intellect
al-Aqṭaʿ, 34
Arabic language see language
al-Arbaʿīn (Abū Zakariyyā Yaḥyā al-Nawawī), 
133, 190, 194
commentaries, 134, 136–48
Arbaʿūnā ḥadīthan (Bahāʾ al-Dīn al-ʿĀmilī), 
159
Aristotle, 165
al-Asfār al-arbaʿa (Mullā Ṣadrā), 150, 151, 
155
aṣḥāb al-ḥadīth (traditionalists), 54, 57
asīr (captive), 253n

 296 
INDEX
authenticity, 228–9, 230, 242, 244 
ʿAbdallāh b. Masʿūd, 227–9
ʿAllāma Muḥammad Ḥusayn Ṭabāṭabāʾī, 
241, 245
Ibn ʿAbbās, 251
India, 208, 209
Kāndhalawī, Muḥammad Zakariyyā, 211, 
215, 219, 221, 222, 223, 224, 229
al-Mubārakfūrī, 227, 228
Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan al-Ṭūsī, 242–3
Qur’an, 249
Shāh Walī Allāh, 228
authorial intentionalism, 60n
authority, 211, 219, 228–9, 230 
ʿAbdallāh b. Masʿūd, 229
India, 208, 209
of isolated hadiths, 245–8, 257
Kāndhalawī, Muḥammad Zakariyyā, 211, 
215, 219
al-Mubārakfūrī, 227, 228
of the Prophet, 249
Qur’an, 250
revelation, 251
Shāh Walī Allāh, 228
automated text analysis, 265
ʿAwālī al-laʾālī (Ibn Abī Jumhūr al-Aḥsāʾī), 157
Awālim al-ʿulūm (Shaykh ʿAbdallāh al-
Baḥrānī), 160
Awjaz al-masālik ilā Muwaṭṭaʾ Mālik 
(Kāndhalawī, Muḥammad Zakariyyā), 
209–15, 218–19, 229, 230
penis, touching the, 212, 219–21 
prayer, raising the hands in, 212, 221–8
Baalbaki, Ramzi, 21, 36
Babanzade Ahmet Naim, 188, 189–90, 193–4, 
195, 197–8, 199–205
bādhaq (wine), 41, 42
Badhl al-majhūd (Khalīl Aḥmad 
Sahāranpūrī), 216, 221
Badr al-Dīn al-ʿAynī, 199, 200–2, 205, 263
al-Mubārakfūrī, 228
ʿUmdat al-qārī fī sharḥ Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī, 
199, 200–1, 263, 273, 274f, 275, 277
Badr al-Dīn al-Damāmīnī, 5n 
Baghdad, 29–30, 32
Bahāʾ al-Dīn al-ʿĀmilī, 159
Baḥr al-fawāʾid (Abū Bakr al-Kalābādhī), 116
Banū Sāsān, 83
al-Banūrī, Muḥammad Yūsuf, 218–19
Barelvīs, the, 207–8
Baṣāʾir al-darajāt (al-Ṣaffār al-Qummī), 152, 
161
Basra, 29 
al-Bayān fī muwāfiqat bayn al-ḥadīth 
wa-l-Qurʾān (Ṭabāṭabāʾī, ʿAllāma 
Muḥammad Ḥusayn), 239
al-Bayḍāwī, 124
BBC (British Broadcasting Company), 187–8 
Bereketzade, İsmail Hakkı, 193
Bernards, Monique, 25 
Bihār al-anwār (Muḥammad Bāqir al-
Majlisī), 21, 155, 156, 157–8, 160, 
172–3, 239
al-Bīrjandī, Ḥusayn al-Ḥasanī, 21, 24
Blecher, Joel, 2, 8, 211, 265
Book of Sir Thomas Moore, The 
(Shakespeare, William), 79–80
British Broadcasting Company (BBC), 187–8 
Brockelmann, Carl, 271
Busra, report of, 220, 221
Caetani, Leone, 197–8
captives, 253n
certainty, 54–5, 246, 247
colonialism, 208, 230, 231
comparative studies 287, 289
content-based criticism (ʿilm al-dirāya), 210, 
211, 229, 241, 242
Cordoba, 30
corpus building, 264–8
corrupt acts, 256
creation, 166
al-Dalāʾil fī gharīb al-ḥadīth/al-Dalāʾil fī 
sharḥ mā aghfala Abū ʿUbayd wa-Ibn 
Qutayba min gharīb al-ḥadith (Abū 
Muḥammad Qāsim b. Thābit and Abū 
al-Qāsim Thābit al-Saraqusṭī), 23, 31
Dalāʾil al-nubuwwa (al-Ḥākim al-Nīsābūrī), 
114
Dār al-Ḥadīth al-Sukriyya, 137, 148
al-Dāraquṭnī, 114–15
dars-i Niẓāmī curriculum, 216
death
strangers, 95
wailing after, 66
Deobandīs, the, 207–8, 228, 229, 231, 286
Kāndhalawī, Muḥammad Zakariyyā, 215
Shāh Walī Allāh, 212–13, 214, 215
al-Dharīʿa ilā uṣūl al-sharīʿa (al-Sharīf  
al-Murtaḍā), 59–60
al-Dhayl ʿalā Ṭabaqāt al-ḥanābila (Ibn 
Rajab), 134
Dhū al-Nūn al-Miṣrī, 95
dictionaries, 19, 35 

  
INDEX 
297
digital age, the 263–4, 274, 289
analytic methods and reproducibility, 
268–9
corpus building, 264–8
DNA approach, 277
isnād recognition, 268–9
new media, 287 
OpenITI corpus, 264, 269–72 
passim software, 265, 269, 272, 273, 275
text reuse from OpenITI, 264, 269, 272–7 
al-Dijwī, Yūsuf, 123n
distraction (waswās), 168
divorce, 212n
Dīwān (ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib), 154
Diyanet (Directorate/Presidency of Religious 
Affairs), 187–8, 189, 190, 194, 195, 197, 
204 
al-Durr al-manthūr fī al-tafsīr bi-l-maʾthūr 
(Jalāl al-Dīn al-Suyūṭī), 240
al-Durr al-nathīr fī talkhīṣ Nihāya Ibn  
al-Athīr (Jalāl al-Dīn al-Suyūṭī), 34
al-Durr al-raṣīn al-mustakhraja min baḥr 
al-Arbaʿīn (Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad 
b. Aḥmad b. Shaykh al-Yusr al-Ḥanafī), 
138
education, 190–3, 194, 248–9
Egypt, 32, 33
Elias, Jamal, 117, 119–20, 122
emanationism, 166–7
Envar-i Kur’an (Bereketzade, İsmail Hakkı), 
193
ethnicity, 8, 25–6, 27–8
ethnography, 285–6
al-Fāʾiq fī gharīb al-ḥadīth (al-Zamakhsharī), 
23, 40
Fakhr al-Dīn ʿAlī b. Muḥammad al-Najafī 
al-Ṭurayḥī, 24
Fakhr al-Dīn ʿIrāqī, 98
al-Fārābī, 165
Fatḥ al-Bārī (Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī), 5n, 
18n, 125–6, 127, 197, 273, 274, 277
Fatḥ al-Bārī sharḥ Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī (Ibn 
Rajab), 142, 144–5, 146, 147–8
Fatḥallāh Kāshānī, 154
Fāṭima (daughter of the Prophet), 253–4
Fāṭima bt. al-Ḥusayn, 52
Fiqh al-riḍā (ʿAlī b. Mūsā al-Riḍā), 155–6
forty hadith genre, 132–3, 189; see also al-
Arbaʿīn 
free will, 127–8
Fuṣūṣ (Ibn ʿArabī), 125
Geschichte der arabischen Literatur 
(Brockelmann, Carl), 271
gharīb, 18
definition, 18–20
Gharīb aḥādīth al-khāṣṣa (Fakhr al-Dīn ʿAlī 
b. Muḥammad al-Najafī al-Ṭurayḥī), 24
Gharīb al-aḥādīth al-madhkūra fī sharḥ 
mukhtaṣar al-Qudūrī li-l-Aqṭaʿ (Ibn 
Quṭlūbughā), 34
gharīb al-ḥadīth (obscure terms), 2, 6n, 
17–18, 42–4 
ʿAlī al-Ḥafīsha, 42
authorship, 17–18
classifying, 19–20, 43
criticism, 41
definition, 19
hadith sciences, 19
historical centres of production, 24–35, 43
history of the genre, 22–4, 43–4
in libraries, 19–20
lexicography, 19, 20
research, 20–2
structure, 35–42
Gharīb al-ḥadīth (Abū Isḥāq al-Ḥarbī), 23, 
35, 38–9
Gharīb al-ḥadīth (Abū Sulaymān al-
Khaṭṭābī), 22, 23
Gharīb al-ḥadīth (Abū ʿUbayd al-Qāsim b. 
Sallām), 6n, 22, 23, 41
Gharīb al-ḥadīth (Abū ʿUbayda Maʿmar b. 
al-Muthannā), 22–3
Gharīb al-ḥadīth (Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī), 
17n–18n
Gharīb al-ḥadīth (Ibn al-Jawzī), 23
Gharīb al-ḥadīth (Ibn Qutayba), 23, 39, 41
Gharīb al-ḥadīth (Ibn Quṭlūbughā), 42
Gharīb al-ḥadīth (al-Naḍr b. Shumayl al-
Māzanī), 23
Gharīb al-ḥadīth fī Bihār al-anwār (al-
Bīrjandī, Ḥusayn al-Ḥasanī), 21, 24
al-Gharīb al-muṣannaf (Abū ʿUbayd  
al-Qāsim b. Sallām), 6n, 19, 23
Ghawālī al-laʾālī (Ibn Abī Jumhūr al-Aḥsāʾī), 
157
Ghāyat al-āmāl (Maḥmūd ʿAlī b. Aṣghar  
al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī), 24
Ghulām Thaʿlab, 28
ghurabāʾ (strangers), etymology and 
semantic field, 84; see also strangers
‘Ghurabāʾ, ghurabāʾ’ anthem, 82
Ghurar al-fawāʾid wa-durar al-qalāʾid  
(al-Sharīf al-Murtaḍā) see Amālī  
al-Murtaḍā

 298 
INDEX
grammar (naḥw), 16, 19, 70, 124 
God, 68–70, 73, 103
intellect, the, 163–4, 166, 170, 174, 175, 
176–7
knowledge of, 176–7
hadith collections, 3–4, 6
primary, 6 
secondary, 6–7 
hadith commentary, 1–11, 133–4, 281–91 
accessibility, 7
classification, 5–7, 243, 257–8, 271
comparative studies, 287, 289
definitions, 2, 3, 4–6, 266
discipline affiliation, 5, 6
ethnicity/race, 8
format, 5–6
genres, 2, 4
line-by-line, 2 
mode of transmission, 6
Ottoman, 189–90
purpose, 8
range of, 2–3
Ṣafavid traditions, 150–1, 152, 153–62, 178
as secondary text, 2–3
sectarian affiliation, 5, 6
Shīʿī, 241–2
social/economic/political forces, 8
Sufi 115–28
Sunnī, 118, 121
textual material, 6
titles of works, 4
translation, 188–90, 193–4, 195, 205, 286
women, 7–8
see also forty hadith genre of hadith 
commentary
hadith criticism, 242–3
narration or transmission-based criticism 
(īlm al-riwāya), 210, 211, 221, 223, 229, 
241, 242
content-based criticism (ʿilm al-dirāya), 
210, 211, 229, 241, 242
Hadith of Gabriel, 118–19
hadith of al-ghurabāʾ, 82, 83
as apocalyptic, 85
‘Blessed are the Strangers narration’, 87–9
commentary, Abū Bakr al-Ājurrī, 91–5
commentary, apocalypse, 98–101
commentary, orthodoxy, 101–4
commentary, piety, 96–8
commentary, post fourth century, 95–6
reception, 91–6
text, 85–6
‘Those who shun their tribes’ narration, 
89–91
transmission, 86–91
hadith sciences, 19
hadith/s (tradition), 50, 84–5, 118, 243–4
Abū Jaʿfar al-Kulaynī, 151
actions are judged by intentions, 142–4
ahl al-bayt, 255, 256, 257
akhbār al-āḥād, 50–1, 54–74, 245–8, 257
apocalyptic, 82, 84–5
Badr al-Dīn al-ʿAynī, 263
belief of beasts, 72–3
brotherhood pact, 70–1
canon, 152–3, 154, 188, 265
compilations, 151–2
contradictions, 66–7, 209, 211, 215, 221, 
222, 224, 228, 229, 242
death, wailing after, 66–7
deathbeds, 72
digital editions, 263–74
Diyanet translation project, 187–90, 194, 
195, 197, 204
of the dot, 154–5
early traditions, 150
evaluating, 204
folk historians 197–8
free will, 127–8
Gabriel, 118–19
of al-ghurabāʾ, 82, 83, 85–104
God and exhaustion, 69–70
God and human hearts, 68–9
ḥadīth Raʾs al-Jālūt, 266–7
hermeneutical tools for interpreting, 
62–73
al-Ḥurr al-ʿĀmilī, 161
on the Imams, 253–7
intellect, the 162–78
intention/deed, 70
isolated, 50–1, 54–74, 245–9, 257 
jary, 254–6, 258–9
jawāmiʿ al-kalim category, 139–41, 147
kinship, 251
legal rulings, conflicts with, 67–8
Muḥammad’s love for prayer, women and 
perfume, 125n 
narrators, 202–3
Ottoman Empire, 189–95
prayer, 146–7, 200, 201 
Qur’an as criterion for evaluating, 249–58
reason, 71–3
recording/writing, 151–2
religious principles, 141
remembrance of God, 146–7

  
INDEX 
299
resurrection, 250–1
revelation, 251–3
Shāh Walī Allāh, 214
shame, 61–2
Shīʿī, 150n, 151, 247–8, 257
tafsīr, 193, 239, 242, 243, 254–7, 258
taṭbīq, 254–7, 258–9
true believers like for their brother what 
they like for themselves, 144–6
see also authenticity; authority; 
transmission
Ḥafṣ b. Ghiyāth, 87, 89, 91
al-Ḥākim al-Nīsābūrī, 114
al-Ḥakīm al-Tirmidhī, 115–16, 117, 125
Ḥālat ahl al-ḥaqīqa maʿ Allāh (Aḥmad al-
Rifāʿī), 117
Ḥanafī legal school, 228–9
Babanzade, Ahmet Naim, 201, 202, 203
Badr al-Dīn al-ʿAynī, 201, 202
divorce, 212n
India, 208, 209, 212
inherited tradition, the, 219
juristic preference, 222–3
Kāndhalawī, Muḥammad Zakariyyā, 210, 
211–12, 215, 217–18, 219, 220, 221–4
legal controversies, 212, 219–26 
Miras, Kamil, 199, 200, 201, 202, 203, 205
penis, touching the, 219, 220, 221
prayer, raising the hands in, 222–4, 225, 
226, 227–8
ṣalāt al-witr, 201
Shāh Walī Allāh, 212
Ḥanbalī legal school, 134, 135, 136, 137, 143, 
146, 148 
penis, touching, the, 219
prayer, raising the hands in, 226
see also Aḥmad b. Ḥanbal
Ḥasan b. ʿAlī, 256
al-Ḥasan al-ʿAskarī, 156
al-Ḥasan al-Ḥillī, 157
Ḥasan b. Muḥammad al-Ṣaghānī, 7n, 191
Ḥilyat al-awliyāʾ (al-Ḥākim al-Nīsābūrī), 114
Hishām b. al-Ḥakam, 73
history, 265
Ḥujjat Allāh al-bāligha (Shāh Walī Allāh), 125
al-Ḥurr al-ʿĀmilī, 150, 156, 161
Ḥusām al-Dīn Muḥammad Ṣāliḥ b. Aḥmad 
Māzandarānī see Muḥammad Ṣāliḥ 
Māzandarānī
al-Ḥusāmī al-Qirīmī, 31 
Ḥusayn b. ʿAlī, 256
Ḥusayn Ilāhī Ardabīlī, 154
Ḥusayn Khwānsārī, 157
Ḥusayn b. Masʿūd al-Baghawī, 6n, 7n, 24, 191 
al-Ḥusayn al-Ṭībī, 121–2, 124, 127
Hushaym b. Bashīr b. al-Qāsim, 15
hypocrites, 252
Ibn ʿAbbās, 252
Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, 95, 101, 104, 210, 227
Ibn ʿAbd al-Hādī, 19
Ibn Abī ʿĀṣim, 113–14
Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd, 96, 154, 271, 275, 277
Ibn Abī Ḥātim al-Rāzī, 243
Ibn Abī Jamra, 120–1, 124, 126–7
Ibn Abī Jumhūr al-Aḥsāʾī, 154, 157
Ibn Abī ʿUmar al-ʿAdanī, 87
Ibn Abī Zaynab ‘al-Kātib’ al-Numʿānī, 150
Ibn ʿArabī, 118–19, 125n 
Ibn ʿAṭāʾ Allāh al-Iskandarī, 95–6, 98
Ibn Bābawayh (Ibn Bābūya al-Qummī)  
al-Shaykh al-Ṣadūq, 21, 24, 43, 100, 
156, 158 
Kamāl al-dīn wa-tamām al-niʿma, 91, 100
Kitāb al-Tawḥīd, 159, 175–8, 266 
Man lā yaḥḍuruhu al-Faqīh, 152, 159, 162
ʿUyūn akhbār al-Riḍā, 266
Ibn Baṭṭāl al-Qurṭubī, 274
Ibn Fūrak al-Iṣbahānī, 28, 125n
Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī, 17n–18n, 33–4, 122, 
125–7, 199, 205 
Fatḥ al-Bārī, 5n, 18n, 125–6, 127, 197, 273, 
274, 277
Gharīb al-ḥadīth, 17n–18n
Kāndhalawī, Muḥammad Zakariyyā, 
217–18
al-Nukhbat al-fikr, 191, 192, 197
Nuzhat al-naẓar, 197 
prayer, raising the hands in, 227
al-Talkhīṣ, 227
Taqrīb al-gharīb, 22
Ibn al-Ḥājj al-ʿAbdarī, 95–6
Ibn al-Ḥājj al-Mālikī, 126
Ibn Ḥazm, 227, 228
Ibn Ḥibbān, 227
Ibn Isḥāq, 202
Ibn al-Jawzī, 23, 27, 30, 41, 42
Ibn Kathīr, 243
Ibn Khaldūn, 16, 20 
Ibn Khātūn al-ʿĀmilī, 157
Ibn Masʿūd, 86, 226–8
Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya, 95–6, 97, 98–9, 100, 
101, 104
Ibn Rajab, 135
Ibn Qūlawayh, 158
Ibn Qurqūl (Ibrāhīm b. Yūsuf ), 31, 33

 300 
INDEX
Ibn Qutayba, 18n, 23, 26–7, 28, 35, 39, 41
intention/deed, 70
poverty, 63
theft, punishment for, 66
Ibn Quṭlūbughā, 34, 42
Ibn Rajab, 134–7, 139–48
Ibn Rajab al-Ḥanbalī, 95–6, 97, 100, 102, 10
Ibn Sīnā, 165, 170, 177   
Ibn Taymiyya, 82, 95–6, 100–1, 102, 104, 244
Ibn ʿUmar, 66, 105
İbrahim Hakkı Efendi, 192
Ibṭāl al-ʿamal bi-akhbār al-āḥād (al-Sharīf 
al-Murtaḍā), 56
ignorance, 167, 168, 174
al-Ihlīlijā fī al-tawḥīd (Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq), 155
al-Iḥtijāj (Aḥmad b. ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib al-
Ṭabrisī), 161
Iḥyāʾ ʿulūm al-dīn (Abū Ḥāmid al-Ghazālī), 
101
ʿIkrima, 202, 203
ʿIlal (Abū ʿĪsa al-Tirmidhī), 136
ʿIlal al-sharāʾiʿ (Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq), 161
Imams, the, 151, 254, 255–6
hadiths on, 253–7
Imāmī scholars, 56–8, 96 
works of, 152–8
ʿInāyatallāh Quhpāʾī Iṣfahānī, 153
India, 207–9, 213, 228
legal controversies, 212, 219–26 
madrasa system, 216
Indonesia, 285–6
inherited tradition, the (al-sunnat al-
mutawāratha), 219
inspirations (ilhām), 168
intellect, the 162–3 
Ibn Sīnā, 170n
Majdhūb-i Tabrīzī, 178
Mīrzā Rafīʿā Nāʾinī, 178
Muḥammad Bāqir al-Majlisī, 172–4, 178
Muḥammad Hādī Shīrāzī, 178
Muḥammad Ṣāliḥ Māzandarānī, 169–71
Mullā Ṣadrā, 163–8, 178
Qāḍī Saʿīd Qummī, 175–8
six senses, 165–6
Iraq, 29, 32
Irshād al-sārī (Aḥmad al-Qasṭallānī), 27, 45
ʿĪsā b. Muḥammad Quṭb al-Dīn al-Safawī,  
34
Iṣlāḥ ghalaṭ Abū ʿUbayd fī Gharīb al-ḥadīth 
(Ibn Qutayba), 39
Iṣlāḥ al-ghalaṭ fī gharīb al-ḥadīth li-Abī 
ʿUbayd al-Qāsim b. Sallām (Ibn 
Qutayba), 23
Islam
apocalypticism, 82, 84–5, 89, 91, 99–100 
best generation, 101
conversion to, 25, 26, 27, 28–9
extremism, 82
history, 100–1, 265
Ibn Rajab al-Ḥanbalī, 100
legal controversies, 212, 219–30
reformation of, 187–8
Shāh Walī Allāh, 213
splinter, 103
strangers, 82, 84–5, 92–3, 96–103, 106
Islamic civilisation, 26
Ismāʿīl b. Muḥammad b. Bardis al-Baʿlbakī, 33
isnād (chains of transmission), 18, 59–60, 
214, 246–7; see also transmission
isnād (digital) recognition, 268–9
isnād structure (of gharīb al-ḥadīth) 35–6, 38 
isolated hadiths, authority of (khabar al-wāḥid) 
245–8, 257
Israelites, 256
al-Istibṣār fīmā ikhtulifa min al-akhbār  
(Abū Jaʿfar al-Ṭūsī), 152, 158, 162, 242
al-Iʿtiṣām (Holding on) (Abū Isḥāq al-Shāṭibī), 
102
Jaʿfar al-Khuldī, 114, 115
Jaʿfar b. Muḥammad al-Ṣādiq, 70, 73, 155–6, 
159, 161, 249, 255
al-Jaʿfarī, Ṣāliḥ, 123n
Jalāl al-Dīn Rūmī, 95–6, 98
Jalāl al-Dīn al-Suyūṭī, 22, 24, 31, 34, 122, 
223, 240
Jamāl al-Dīn Maḥmūd Shīrāzī, 154
al-Jāmiʿ al-kabīr (Abū ʿĪsa al-Tirmidhī)  
see Jāmiʿ al-Tirmidhī  
al-Jāmiʿ al-ṣaghīr (Jalāl al-Dīn al-Suyūṭī), 24, 
122, 192
al-Jāmiʿ al-Ṣaḥīḥ (Abū ʿĪsa al-Tirmidhī) see 
Jāmiʿ al-Tirmidhī  
Jāmiʿ al-ruwāt (Muḥammad Ardabīlī), 153
Jāmiʿ al-Tirmidhī (al-Ḥakīm al-Tirmidhī), 86, 
192, 220, 226
Jāmiʿ al-ʿulūm wa-l-ḥikam fī sharḥ khamsīn 
ḥadīthan min jawāmiʿ al-kalim (Ibn 
Rajab), 134, 136–7, 139–48
jary (flowing [movement]), 254–6, 258–9
jawāmiʿ al-kalim concept, 139–41, 147
jihad, 104–6
jurisprudential differences, 208–9, 214–15, 
217–18, 242
juristic preference (tarjīḥ), 215, 222–3, 224, 
229, 224

  
INDEX 
301
al-Kāfī (Abū Jaʿfar al-Kulaynī), 73, 150, 151, 
152, 159–60, 162–3
commentary, Mīr Dāmād, 159n
commentary, Muḥammad Bāqir al-Majlisī, 
158, 172–4, 178
commentary, Muḥammad Ṣāliḥ 
Māzandarānī, 168–72, 275–6
commentary, Mullā Ṣadrā, 151, 160, 
163–8, 178
commentary, Qāḍī Saʿīd Qummī, 175–8
digital representation, 272, 276–7
al-Ḥurr al-ʿĀmilī, 161
intellect case study, 162–78
Muḥsin Fayḍ Kāshānī, 162
Ṭabāṭabāʾī, ʿAllāma Muḥammad Ḥusayn, 
239
Kamāl al-dīn wa-tamām al-niʿma (Ibn 
Bābawayh [Ibn Bābūya al-Qummī]  
al-Shaykh al-Ṣadūq), 91, 100
Kāmil al-ziyāra (Ibn Qūlawayh), 158
Kāndhalawī, Muḥammad Ilyās, 210
Kāndhalawī, Muḥammad Zakariyyā, 209–12, 
214–19, 230–1
juristic preference, 215, 222–3, 224, 229
legal controversies, 212, 219–30
penis, touching the, 212, 219–21 
prayer, raising the hands in, 212, 221–8
Kanz al-ḥaqāʾiq wa-l-maʿārif (Jaʿfar al-
Ṣādiq), 155
Kashf al-kurba bi-waṣf ḥāl ahl al-ghurba (Ibn 
Rajab al-Ḥanbalī), 95–6, 97
Kashmīrī, Anwar Shāh, 224
al-Kashshāf (al-Zamakhsharī), 121, 124
al-Kawtharī, Muḥammad Zāhid (Kevseri, 
Muhammed Zahit), 189, 191n, 192 
Kelime-i Tayyibe journal, 190, 193
Kevseri, Muhammed Zahit (Muḥammad 
Zāhid al-Kawtharī), 189, 191n, 192 
khabar mutawātir (concurrent report), 50, 
51, 55, 58, 245n
khabar al-wāḥid (single, isolated tradition) 
see akhbār al-āḥād
Khalīl b. Aḥmad Kitāb al-ʿAyn al-Farāhīdī, 
17, 81
Khalīl Aḥmad Sahāranpūrī, 216, 221
khamr (wine), 36–7, 41, 42
al-Kharkūshī, 114
al-Khaṭīb al-Baghdādī, 114
al-Khaṭīb al-Tabrīzī, 121, 127
Khomeini, Ruhollah (Ayatollah), 266, 267
Khurāsān, 28–9
[al-Kifāya fī] naẓm al-Nihāya (Ismāʿīl b. 
Muḥammad b. Bardis al-Baʿlbakī), 33
kinship, 251
Kırk Kudsi Hadis (ʿAlī al-Qārī), 194
al-Kirmānī, 123
Kitāb al-Ashriba wa-dhikr ikhtilāf al-nās fīhā 
(Ibn Qutayba), 39–40
Kitāb al-ʿAyn (Khalīl b. Aḥmad Kitāb al-ʿAyn 
al-Farāhīdī), 17, 81
Kitāb al-Fānaʾ fī al-mushāhada (Muḥyī  
al-Dīn Ibn ʿArabī), 118–19
Kitāb al-Fitan (Nuʿaym b. Ḥammād al-
Marwazī), 105
Kitāb al-Gharībayn fī al-Qurʾān wa-l-ḥadīth 
(Abū ʿUbayd Aḥmad al-Harawī), 23, 41
Kitāb al-Ghurabāʾ (Abū Bakr al-Ājurrī), 91–2
Kitāb al-Ghurabāʾ (anon.), 81
Kitāb al-Jihād (ʿAbdallāh b. al-Mubārak), 105
Kitāb al-Maḥāsin (Aḥmad b. Muḥammad 
al-Barqī), 152 
KITAB (Knowledge, Information 
Technology and the Arabic Book) 
project, 269, 270, 275
Kitāb al-Rijāl (Sayyid Ibrāhīm Āmulī), 153
Kitāb al-Rijāl al-kabīr (ʿInāyatallāh Quhpāʾī 
Iṣfahānī), 153
Kitāb al-Sunna (Ibn Abī ʿĀṣim), 114
Kitāb al-Tafarrud wa-l-ʿuzla (Abū Bakr al-
Ājurrī), 92–5
Kitāb al-Tawḥīd (Abū Manṣūr Māturīdī), 73
Kitāb al-Tawḥīd [Ibn Bābawayh (Ibn Bābūya 
al-Qummī] al-Shaykh al-Ṣadūq), 159, 
175–8, 266
knowledge, 176–7
Kufa, 29, 87, 89–90, 91
al-Kūranī, 119
language, 15–17
Abū Sulaymān al-Khaṭṭābī, 27
dictionaries, 19, 35 
grammar, 16, 19, 70, 124 
Ibn Abī Jamra, 121
Ibn al-Jawzī, 27
Ibn Qutayba, 26–7
lexicography, 16, 19, 20, 42
Majd al-Dīn b. al-Athīr, 27
mawālī, 25, 26
obscure terms, 17, 18–19 
OpenITI, 270
rhetoric, 65, 69
al-Sharīf al-Murtaḍā, 60–1, 63–71, 74
translation, 188–90, 193–4, 195, 205, 286
Turkish law, 195
vocabularies, 19, 63–5
al-Zamakhsharī, 27 

 302 
INDEX
Lawāmiʿ al-anwār fī naẓm gharīb al-Muwaṭṭaʾ 
wa-Muslim (Muḥammad b. Muḥammad 
al-Baʿlī al-Mawṣilī), 33
Lawāmiʿ-yi ṣāḥibqirānī (Muḥammad Taqī 
al-Majlisī), 159
legal controversies, 212, 219–26 
legal rulings, conflicts with, 67–8
lexicography (lugha), 16, 19, 20, 42
libraries, 19–20
line-by-line commentaries (shurūḥ), 2
linguistic sources, 16–17
Lisān al-ʿArab (Muḥammad b. Mukarram b. 
Manẓūr), 19, 43
literary-theological approach, 62
literature, 60
Lubb al-lubāb fī gharīb al-ḥadīth wa-l-kitāb 
(Muḥammad Riḍā b. Qāsim al-Najafī), 
24
Madārij al-sālikīn (Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya), 
97
Madīnat al-ʿilm (Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq), 161
al-Madkhal (Ibn al-Ḥājj al-Mālikī), 126
madrasa system, 190–3, 216, 218
al-Maḥāsin (Aḥmad al-Barqī), 158
Maḥmūd ʿAlī b. Aṣghar al-Ṭabāṭabāʾī, 24
Maḥmūd al-Ālūsī, 243
Majd al-Dīn b. al-Athīr, 15–16, 22, 23
alcoholic beverages, 42
criticism, 41
language, 27
al-Nihāya fī gharīb al-ḥadīth, 15, 20, 22, 
23, 24, 30, 32, 33, 34, 41
structure, 35
Majdhūb-i Tabrīzī, 178
Majmaʿ al-baḥrayn wa-maṭlaʿ al-nīrayn fī 
gharīb al-Qurʾān wa-l-ḥadīth (Fakhr 
al-Dīn ʿAlī b. Muḥammad al-Najafī 
al-Ṭurayḥī), 24
Majmaʿ biḥār al-anwār fī gharāʾib al-tanzīl 
wa laṭāʾif al-akhbār (Muḥammad Ṭāhir 
ʿAlī al-Patanī), 34
Majmaʿ al-rijāl (ʿInāyatallāh Quhpāʾī Iṣfahānī), 
153
Majmūʿat al-fatāwa (Ibn Taymiyya), 100–1
al-Maknūn fī ḥaqāʾiq al-kalim al-nabawiyya 
(Rūzbihān Baqlī), 122, 123
Malaysia, 285–6
Mālik b. Anas, 30, 127n–8n, 216, 219; see 
also Awjaz al-masālik ilā Muwaṭṭaʾ 
Mālik; Muwaṭṭaʾ 
Mālik b. Dīnār, 94
Mālikī legal school, 30
juristic preference, 222
penis, touching, the, 219, 20
prayer, raising the hands in, 222, 225
Mamlūk Empire, 32, 33
society, 33–4
Man lā yaḥḍuruhu al-Faqīh (Ibn Bābawayh 
[Ibn Bābūya al-Qummī] al-Shaykh al-
Ṣadūq) 152, 159, 162
Manāzil al-sāʾirīn (Shaykh al-Anṣārī al-
Harawī), 97
al-Manhaj al-mubīn fī sharḥ al-Arbaʿīn (al-
Tāj ʿUmar b. ʿAlī b. Sālim b. Ṣadāqa 
al-Fākihānī al-Lakhmī), 138–9
Manhaj al-naqd fī ʿulūm al-ḥadīth (Nūr al-
Dīn ʿItr), 242
al-Manhiyyāt (al-Ḥakīm al-Tirmidhī), 116, 
117
manuscript culture, 187
Maʿrifat ʿulūm al-ḥadīth (al-Ḥākim al-
Nīsābūrī), 114
Marwān b. al-Ḥakam, 219–20
Marwān b. Muʿāwiya b. al-Fazārī, 87, 89n
Maṣābīḥ al-Jāmiʿ (Badr al-Dīn al-
Damāmīnī), 5n
Maṣābīḥ al-sunna (Ḥusayn b. Masʿūd al-
Baghawī), 6n, 7n, 24, 191, 192
al-Masāʾil wa-l-ajwiba fī al-ḥadīth wa-l-tafsīr 
(Ibn Qutayba), 23, 39
Masānīd Abī Ḥanīfa al-sabʿat ʿashara (Abī 
Ḥanīfa), 192
Mashāriq al-anwār ʿalā ṣaḥīḥ/ṣiḥāḥ al-āthār 
(fī tafsīr gharīb al-ḥadīth) (Qāḍī ʿIyāḍ), 
23, 31, 40
Mashāriq al-anwār al-Nabawiyya (Ḥasan b. 
Muḥammad al-Ṣaghānī), 7n, 191, 192
Mashāriq anwār al-yaqīn (Rajab al-Bursī), 
157  
Masnavī-yi Maʿnavī (Jalāl al-Dīn Rūmī), 98 
Maṭāliʿ al-anwār ʿalā ṣiḥāḥ al-āthār (fī fatḥ 
mā istaghlaqa min kitāb al-Muwaṭṭaʾ 
wa-kitāb Muslim wa-kitāb al-Bukhārī) 
(Ibn Qurqūl [Ibrāhīm b. Yūsuf ]), 31, 33
matn (text; content), 18, 214, 246
content-based criticism (ʿilm al-dirāya), 
210, 211, 229, 241, 242
al-Matroudi, Abdul-Hakim, 135
al-Mawāhib (al-Qasṭallānī ), 192
mawālī, 25–6, 27–8
Maytham al-Baḥrānī, 154
media, new, 287
migration, 81, 89, 91, 99
Mīr Dāmād, 153, 157, 159
Mīr Ḥusayn Maybudī, 154

  
INDEX 
303
Miras, Kamil, 189, 190, 192–3, 198–202, 203–5
Mirʾāt al-ʿuqūl (Muḥammad Bāqir al-
Majlisī), 160, 242
Mirqāt al-asrār wa-miʿrāj al-anwār (Qāḍī 
Saʿīd Qummī), 175–8
Mīrzā ʿAbdallāh Afandī, 156–7
Mīrzā Rafīʿā Nāʾinī, 178
Miṣbāh al-sharīʿa wa-miftāḥ al-ḥaqīqa (Jaʿfar 
al-Ṣādiq), 155
Mishkāt al-maṣābīḥ (al-Khaṭīb al-Tabrīzī), 
121–2, 127, 192
al-Mīzān fī tafsīr al-Qurʾān (Ṭabāṭabāʾī, 
ʿAllāma Muḥammad Ḥusayn), 238, 
239–42, 243, 244–9
Qur’an as criterion of hadith assessment, 
250–8
mizr (beer), 37, 40, 41–2
moral psychology, 166, 167–8
Motālā, Muḥammad Yūsuf, 218
motion in substance, 167
al-Mubārakfūrī, 226–8, 229
al-Mufaḍḍal b. ʿUmar, 160
al-Mufīd, 52, 53, 54, 151n, 158, 241n
al-Muhallab b. Abī Ṣufra, 274
Muḥammad, Prophet 
brotherhood pact, 70–1
hadith transmission, 249
jawāmiʿ al-kalim concept, 139
love for prayer, women and perfume, 125n
obstacles, 99
strangers, 82, 85, 93
teachings of, 248–9
Muḥammad b. ʿAbbād, 87
Muḥammad b. Aḥmad b. Kaysān, 28
Muḥammad b. Aḥmad al-Mustanīr Quṭrub, 
27
Muḥammad b. ʿAlī b. Bābūyah al-Ṣadūq, 54
Muḥammad b. ʿAlī al-Bāqir, 249, 255
Muḥammad b. ʿAlī al-Jawwād, 249
Muḥammad b. ʿAlī b. Qahb b. Daqīq al-ʿĪd, 
138
Muḥammad b. ʿAlī al-Shawkānī, 212
Muḥammad Ardabīlī, 153
Muḥammad Bāqir al-Majlisī, 21, 150–1, 153, 
154, 155–6, 157–8, 160, 172–4, 178, 
239, 242
Muḥammad Hādī Shīrāzī, 178
Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan al-Shaybānī, 216
Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan al-Ṭūsī see Abū 
Jaʿfar al-Ṭūsī
Muḥammad b. Idrīs al-Ḥillī, 56n–7n
Muḥammad b. Idrīs al-Shāfiʿī, 143
Muḥammad Ismāʿīl, 215
Muḥammad b. Muḥammad al-Baʿlī  
al-Mawṣilī, 31, 32–3
Muḥammad b. Mukarram b. Manẓūr, 19
Muḥammad Riḍā b. Qāsim al-Najafī, 24
Muḥammad Ṣāliḥ Māzandarānī, 150–1, 160, 
168–72, 275–7
Muḥammad Ṭāhir ʿAlī al-Patanī, 34
Muḥammad Taqī al-Majlisī, 157
Muḥammad b. ʿUmar al-Wāqidī, 203
Muḥammad Yaḥyā, 215, 230, 231
al-Muḥaqqiq al-Ḥillī, 161
Muḥsin Fayḍ Kāshānī, 150, 161–2
Muḥyī al-Dīn Ibn ʿArabī, 118–19, 125n
al-Muʿīn ʿalā tafahhum al-arbaʿīn (Abū Ḥafṣ 
ʿAlī b. al-Mulaqqin al-Anṣārī), 138
Muʿjam al-ṣaḥāba (Abū Nuʿaym al-Iṣfahānī), 
114
al-Mujarrad li-lughat [or gharīb] al-ḥadīth 
(Muwaffaq al-Dīn ʿAbd al-Laṭīf al-
Baghdādī), 30, 32
Mujlī mirʾāt al-munjī (Ibn Abī Jumhūr  
al-Aḥsāʾī), 154
al-Mukhaṣṣaṣ (Abū al-Ḥasan ʿAlī b. [Aḥmad] 
b. Ismāʿīl b. Sīda), 19, 43
Mukhtaṣar fī al-fiqh al-Ḥanafī (Aḥmad b. 
Muḥammad al-Qudūrī), 34
al-Mukhtaṣar al-naṣīḥ (al-Muhallab b. Abī 
Ṣufra), 274
Mukhtaṣar al-Nihāya (ʿAlī al-Hindī), 34
Mukhtaṣar al-Nihāya (ʿAlī al-Muttaqī al-
Hindī), 34
Mukhtaṣar al-Nihāya (ʿĪsā b. Muḥammad 
Quṭb al-Dīn al-Safawī), 34
Mullā Ṣadrā, 150, 151, 155, 160, 163–8, 178
Muntakhab baṣāʾir al-darajāt (al-Ḥasan  
al-Ḥillī), 157
Muntakhab maṭāliʿ al-anwār (al-Ḥusāmī 
al-Qirīmī), 31
Muqaddima (Ibn Khaldūn), 16, 20 
al-Muqniʾa (al-Mufīd), 158
Mūsā b. Jaʿfar al-Kāẓim, 249
muṣannaf works, 3n
Muslim b. Ḥajjāj, 86, 128n, 191, 223, 265
Musnad (Aḥmad b. Ḥanbal), 86, 146–7
Musnad Abī Ḥanīfa (Abī Ḥanīfa), 192
Musnad Abī Yaʿlā (Abū Yaʿla al-Mawṣīlī), 89n
Musnad Aḥmad (Aḥmad b. Ḥanbal), 192
Musnad al-Shāfiʿī (Muḥammad b. Idrīs al-
Shāfiʿī), 192
Mustadrak (al-Ḥākim al-Nīsābūrī), 114
mutawātir hadiths, 18
Muʿtazilī legal school, 96
Muʿtazilī-Shīʿī legal school, 51n, 53, 62, 68 

 304 
INDEX
Muther, Ryan, 269
Muwaffaq al-Dīn ʿAbd al-Laṭīf al-Baghdādī, 
30
Muwaṭṭaʾ (Mālik b. Anas), 30, 115, 127n–8n, 
214, 219, 230 
digital representation, 275
prayer, raising the hands in, 221–2, 226
transmission, 192
see also Awjaz al-masālik ilā Muwaṭṭaʾ 
Mālik
al-Naḍr b. Shumayl al-Māzanī, 15, 23, 29
Nahj al-balāgha (ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib), 52, 96, 
153–4, 267, 271–2, 275
Najm al-Dīn (al-Muḥaqqiq al-Ḥillī), 161
Najm al-Dīn Sulaymān b. ʿAbd al-Qawī b. 
ʿAbd al-Marīn al-Ṭūfī al-Ḥanbalī, 138, 
144
narration or transmission-based criticism 
(īlm al-riwāya), 210, 211, 221, 223, 229, 
241, 242
al-Nasāʾī, 125n
Naṣṣār, Ḥusayn, 21, 22
Nathr farāʾid al-murbiʿīn al-manwiyya fī 
nashr fawāʾid al-Arbaʿīn al-Nawawiyya 
(Zayn al-Dīn Sarīja b. Muḥammad b. 
Sarīja b. Aḥmad al-Malṭī al-Shāfiʿī), 138
Nawādir al-uṣūl (al-Ḥakīm al-Tirmidhī), 
115–16, 125
Nawas, John, 25
naẓm al-Nihāya (Ismāʿīl b. Muḥammad b. 
Bardis al-Baʿlbakī), 33 
Neplatonism, 176, 177–8
al-Nihāya fī gharīb al-ḥadīth wa-l-athar 
(Majd al-Dīn b. al-Athīr), 15, 20, 22, 23, 
24, 30, 32, 33, 34, 41
Nihāyat al-arab (al-Nuwayrī), 277
Niẓām al-Dīn Gīlānī, 154
Niẓāmī curriculum, 216
Niẓāmiyya madrasa, 30
non-Arabs, 25–8
non-Muslims, 286
Nuʿaym b. Ḥammād al-Marwazī, 105
Nūḥ b. Abī Maryam Abū ʿIsma al-Marwazī, 
202, 203
al-Nukhbat al-fikr (Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī), 
191, 192, 197
Nuʿmānī, Shiblī, 208–9, 229
Nūr al-anwār fī sharḥ al-Ṣaḥīfa al-sajjādiyya 
(Sayyid Niʿmatallāh al-Jazāʾirī), 157
Nūr al-Dīn ʿItr 242
Nūr al-Dīn b. al-Khaṭīb al-Dahsha al-Ḥamawī, 
31
al-Nuwayrī, 277
Nuzhat al-naẓar (Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī), 197 
obscure terms, 17, 18–19 
Open Islamicate Texts Initiative (OpenITI), 
264–6, 269–72 
attributions, inconsistent, 266–7
isnād recognition, 269 
KITAB project, 269, 270 
text reuse, 264, 269, 272–7 
Ottoman Empire, 33, 34, 189–95
madrasa system, 190–3
see also Turkey
parents, 253 
passim software, 265, 269, 272, 273, 275 
penis, touching the, 212, 219–21  
philosophy, 239
political instability, 33
Posterior Analytics (Kitāb al-Burhān) 
(Aristotle), 165
poverty, 63–4
prayer, 146–7, 200, 201 
raising the hands in, 212, 221–8
ṣalāt al-witr, 201
primary hadith collections, 6 
primary texts, 2–3
print culture, 287
prohibitions, 116
Qadariyya sect, 127
al-Qāḍī ʿAbd al-Jabbār b. Aḥmad al-
Hamadhanī, 53
Qāḍī ʿIyāḍ al-Yaḥṣubī, 23, 31, 40, 95
Qāḍī Saʿīd Qummī, 151, 159, 175–8, 266–7
al-Qawāʿid al-fiqhiyya (Ibn Rajab), 134, 136
qiyās (analogy), 56
al-Qūnawī, 119, 120, 123
Qur’an, the, 16
ahl al-dhikr, 254, 255–6
believers praised in, 257
contradictions, 66–7
as criterion of hadith assessment, 249–58
fire, 65
food, giving to the needy, 253–4, 255
hermeneutical tools for interpreting, 62–73
hypocrites, 252
Imams, references to, 253–7
Israelites, 256
kinship, 251
legal rulings, conflicts with, 67–8
paired expressions, 69
parents, 253 

  
INDEX 
305
punishment in the afterlife, 66–7
resurrection, 250–1
revelation, 252, 253–4
teachers of, 248–9
theft, punishment for, 67
see also Qur’an commentary
Qur’an commentary, 117, 119–20 
Sufi, 122–3, 124, 128
see also tafsīr
Qur’anic exegesis see Ṭabāṭabāʾī, ʿAllāma 
Muḥammad Ḥusayn
Qurboniev, Aslisho, 275
al-Qurṭubī, 124, 125n
al-Qushayrī, 114, 117
race, 8; see also ethnicity
Rajab al-Bursī, 157
Raʾs al-Jālūt, 266
Rashīd Aḥmad Gangōhī, 215
rationalist attitude to akhbār al-āḥād, 50–1
al-Rawāshiḥ al-samāwiyya (Mīr Dāmād), 
153
Rawḍat al-abrār (ʿAlī b. al-Ḥasan Zavārī 
Iṣfahānī), 154
Rawḍat al-muttaqīn (Muḥammad Taqī  
al-Majlisī), 159
al-Rāzī, 124
reason, 53, 71–3
recording, 151–2
refugees see migration
religion, relationship with texts, 188
resurrection, 250–1
revelation, 164, 251–4
rhetoric, 65, 69
al-Riʿāya fī ʿilm al-dirāya (al-Shahīd al-Thānī), 
152
al-Risāla (al-Qushayrī), 114
al-Risāla al-dhahabiyya (ʿAlī b. Mūsā al-Riḍā), 
155–6
al-Risāla fī al-ʿaql (al-Fārābī), 165
Riyāḍ al-sālikīn fī sharḥ Ṣaḥīfat Sayyid 
al-Sājidīn (Sayyid ʿAlī Khān Madanī 
Shīrāzī), 157
Rosenthal, Franz, 81, 82, 83, 84
Rūzbihān Baqlī, 122, 123
Saʿd b. Abī Waqqāṣ, 253
Saʿd al-Dīn Masʿūd ʿUmar al-Taftazānī, 138
Ṣafavid period, 150
canon of hadith, 152–3, 154
commentary traditions, 150–1, 152, 153–62, 
178 
intellect case study, 162–78
al-Ṣaffār al-Qummī, 152, 161
al-Ṣaḥīfa (ʿAlī b. Mūsā al-Riḍā), 155–6 
al-Ṣaḥīfa al-sajjādiyya (ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn 
Zayn al-ʿĀbidīn), 153, 156–7
Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī (Abū ʿAbdallāh 
Muḥammad b. Ismāʿīl. al-Bukhārī), 7n, 
114, 127, 128n, 142, 200
Ambrosiana Library manuscript, 281–5
digital representation, 265, 273, 274
Diyanet, 187–8
Ibn Rajab, 136, 142, 144, 147–8
Kāndhalawī, Muḥammad Zakariyyā, 217
Kevseri, Zahit, 192
Miras, Kamil, 199
Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī commentaries, 191, 273–5
Abū Sulaymān al-Khaṭṭābī, 115
Ambrosiana Library manuscript, 281–5
digital representation, 273–5
Ibn Abī Jamra, 120–1, 126, 127
Ibn Ḥajar, 122, 197
Ibn Rajab, 136, 142, 144–5, 146, 147–8
al-Kirmānī, 123n 
see also Sahih-i Buhari Muhtasarı: 
Tecrid-i Sarih Tercümesi; ʿUmdat al-qārī 
fī sharḥ Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī
Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim (Muslim b. Ḥajjāj), 86, 128n, 
191, 192, 265
Sahih-i Buhari Muhtasarı: Tecrid-i Sarih 
Tercümesi (Ez-Zebidi, Zeynüddin 
Ahmed b. Ahmed b. Abdillatif [al-
Zabīdī, Zayn al-Dīn Aḥmad b. Aḥmad 
b. ʿAbd al-Laṭīf ]; tr. Babanzade, Ahmet 
Naim and Miras, Kamil), 187, 188–9, 
193, 194, 195–9
religious authority contestations, 199–204
Sahl al-Tustarī, 112–13, 115, 127–8
Said the Prophet of God (Blecher, Joel), 8, 290
Salafī legal school, 208, 209, 212, 228–9
contradictions, 222
divorce, 212n
legal controversies, 212, 219–26 
Shāh Walī Allāh, 212–13, 214
ṣalāt al-witr (last prayer), 201
Salmān al-Fārisī, 71
satanic distraction (waswās), 168
Savant, Sarah, 275
al-Ṣawārim al-muhriqa (Sayyid Nūrallāh 
Shushtarī), 153
Sayyid ʿAlī Khān Madanī Shīrāzī, 157
Sayyid Hāshim al-Baḥrānī, 243
Sayyid Ibrāhīm Āmulī, 153
Sayyid Niʿmatallāh al-Jazāʾirī, 157
Sayyid Nūrallāh Shushtarī, 153

 306 
INDEX
Sayyid Raḍī al-Dīn ʿAlī Ibn Ṭāwūs, 155
secondary hadith collections, 6–7 
secondary texts, 2–3
al-Shāfī fī al-imāma (al-Sharīf al-Murtaḍā), 
59
Shāfiʿī legal school, 142, 147–8
juristic preference, 222
penis, touching the, 219, 220
prayer, raising the hands in, 222, 226
Shāh Muḥammad Dārābī Shīrāzī, 157
Shāh Walī Allāh, 211, 212–15, 219, 229–30, 
231
juristic preference, 224, 225–6
penis, touching the, 220, 221
prayer, raising the hands in, 225–6, 228
al-Shahīd al-Thānī, 152
Shakespeare, William, 79–80 
Shams al-Dīn, 98
Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad b. Aḥmad b. 
Shaykh al-Yusr al-Ḥanafī, 138
Sharāʾiʿ al-islām fī masāʾil al-ḥalāl wa-l-
ḥarām (al-Muḥaqqiq al-Ḥillī), 161
Sharḥ al-Arbaʿīn ḥadīthan li-l-Nawawī 
(Muḥammad b. ʿAlī b. Qahb b. Daqīq 
al-ʿĪd), 138
Sharḥ al-Arbaʿīn al-Nawawiyya (Shihāb al-
Dīn Abū al-ʿAbbās Aḥmad b. Farḥ b. 
Aḥmad al-Ishbīlī), 138
Sharḥ ḥadīth Umm Zarʿ (ʿAbd Allāh ibn 
Muḥammad Shinshawrī), 6n
Sharḥ Nahj al-balāgha (Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd), 
271, 275, 277
Sharḥ Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī (Ibn Baṭṭāl al-
Qurṭubī), 274
Sharḥ al-Taftazānī ʿalā al-aḥādīth al-Arbaʿīn 
al-Nawawiyya (Saʿd al-Dīn Masʿūd 
ʿUmar al-Taftazānī), 138
Sharḥ Uṣūl al-Kāfī (Muḥammad Ṣāliḥ 
Māzandarānī), 275–7
al-Sharīf al-Murtaḍā, 51–4, 73–4, 267
akhbār al-āḥād, interpreting, 58–62, 74
akhbār al-āḥād, rejection of, 54–8, 73
certainty, 54–5
hermeneutical tools for interpreting 
traditions, 62–73, 74
isnād (chains of transmission), 59–60
poverty, 63–4
al-Sharīf al-Raḍī, 52, 153, 267, 271
al-Shawkānī, Muḥammad, 283, 284f
Shaykh ʿAbdallāh al-Baḥrānī, 160
al-Shaykh Abū Jaʿfar al-Ṭūsī, 152, 158
Shaykh al-Anṣārī al-Harawī, 97
Shaykh Bahāʾ al-Dīn al-ʿĀmilī, 156
al-Shaykh al-Mufīd, 52, 53, 54, 151n, 158, 
241n
al-Shaykh al-Ṣadūq Ibn Bābawayh al-Qummī 
21, 24, 43, 100, 156, 158 
Kamāl al-dīn wa-tamām al-niʿma, 91, 100
Kitāb al-Tawḥīd, 159, 175–8, 266 
Man lā yaḥḍuruhu al-Faqīh, 152, 159, 162
ʿUyūn akhbār al-Riḍā, 266
al-Shaykh al-Ṭūsī, 56n, 57n, 60
al-Shifāʾ: Fī al-nafs (Ibn Sīnā), 165, 192
Shihāb al-Dīn Abū al-ʿAbbās Aḥmad b. Farḥ 
b. Aḥmad al-Ishbīlī, 138
Shīʿī legal school, 21, 24, 34–5, 43, 241–2 
ahl al-dhikr, 254
akhbār al-āḥād, 56n, 57–8
hadiths, 150n, 151, 247–8, 257 
Qur’an, the, 250, 253–4
revelation, 253–4
al-Sharīf al-Murtaḍā, 53–4, 68
strangers, 91, 96
Ṭabāṭabāʾī, ʿAllāma Muḥammad Ḥusayn, 
257
works, digital representation, 271, 272, 275
see also Muʿtazilī-Shīʿī legal school
single, isolated traditions (akhbār al-āḥād) 
see akhbār al-āḥād
Sırat-ı Müstakim journal, 190, 193
strangers (ghurabāʾ), 79–81 
Abū al-ʿAbbās al-Mursī, 97–8
Abū Bakr al-Ājurrī, 92–5, 97, 98, 99
Abū Isḥāq al-Shāṭibī, 95–6, 99, 100, 102–3, 
104
Banū Sāsān, 83
deaths, 95
definitions, 81, 85, 96 
diversity of, 86
as elite, 86, 95
exile, 81, 93–4, 95, 104 
happiness, 82
Ibn ʿAṭāʾ Allāh al-Iskandarī, 95–6, 98
Ibn al-Qayyim al-Jawziyya, 95–6, 97, 98–9, 
100, 101, 104
Ibn Rajab al-Ḥanbalī, 95–6, 97, 100, 102, 
104
Jalāl al-Dīn Rūmī, 95–6, 98
jihad, 104–6
loneliness, 80, 93 
migration, 81, 89, 91, 99
modern usage, 82
sadness, 80, 81, 82, 93, 94, 95 
virtues, 82–3, 93, 94, 106
see also hadith of al-ghurabāʾ
subjectivity, 231

  
INDEX 
307
Sufi legal school, 96, 97, 112–13
Ahl al-Ḥadīth movement, 113–15
annihilation, 217 
expertise, 124, 125, 128
hadith commentary, 115–28 
Kāndhalawī, Muḥammad Zakariyyā, 
216–17, 218
propriety, 116, 120
Qur’an commentary, 122–3, 124, 128 
themes, 124
‘Ṣūfī tafsīr Reconsidered’ (Jamal Elias), 122
Sufyān al-Thawrī, 94, 124
Sunan (Abū Dāwūd al-Sijistānī), 113, 114, 
115, 192, 216, 217
Sunan (al-Nasāʾī), 125n, 192
Sunan al-Dārimī (Abū Muḥammad al-
Dārimī), 7n, 86, 114
Sunan Ibn Mājah (Abū ʿAbdallāh al-Qazwīnī 
Ibn Mājah), 86, 192
Sunan al-Tirmidhī (Abū ʿĪsa al-Tirmidhī)  
see Jāmiʿ al-Tirmidhī
Sunna, the, 97, 99, 101, 102–4, 201, 211;  
see also authenticity; authority 
Sunnī legal school, 21, 34, 43
ahl al-dhikr, 254
Ahl al-Ḥadīth movement, 113
Baghdad, 29–30
ecumenism, 229–30, 231
expertise, 128
hadith commentary, 118, 121 
hadiths, 247–8
revelation, 254
strangers, 91, 97
works, digital representation, 271
Suwayd b. Saʿīd, 87, 89n
Syed, M. 269
Syria, 32
al-Taʿarruf li-madhhab ahl al-taṣawwuf (Abū 
Bakr al-Kalābādhī), 116
Ṭabaqāt al-ḥanābil (Abū al-Ḥusayn 
Muḥammad b. Abī al-Yaʿlā), 136
Ṭabaqāt al-nussāk (Abū Saʿīd b. al-Aʿrābī), 
114, 115
al-Ṭabarī, 277
Ṭabāṭabāʾī, ʿAllāma Muḥammad Ḥusayn, 
238–42, 243, 244–9, 257–8
Qur’an as criterion of hadith assessment, 
250–7
Tablīghī Jamāʿat, 209–10, 218
tafsīr (Qur’an commentary; interpretation), 
193, 239, 242, 243, 254–7, 258; see also 
Qur’an commentary
Tafsīr gharīb al-Muwaṭṭaʾ (ʿAbd al-Malik b. 
Ḥabīb al-Qurṭubī), 40
al-Tafsīr al-mansūb (al-Ḥasan al-ʿAskarī), 156
Tahdhīb al-aḥkām fī sharḥ al-muqniʾa (Abū 
Jaʿfar al-Ṭūsī), 152, 158, 162, 242
Tahdhīb al-asrār (al-Kharkūshī), 114
Tahdhīb al-maṭāliʿ (Nūr al-Dīn b. al-Khaṭīb 
al-Dahsha al-Ḥamawī), 31
al-Tāj ʿUmar b. ʿAlī b. Sālim b. Ṣadāqa  
al-Fākihānī al-Lakhmī, 138–9
al-Tajrīd al-ṣarīḥ (Aḥmad b. Aḥmad al-
Zabīdī), 190, 193, 195, 197; see also 
Sahih-i Buhari Muhtasarı: Tecrid-i 
Sarih Tercümesi
al-Taʿlīqa ʿalā al-fawāʾid al-raḍawiyya 
(Khomeini, Ruhollah), 266
al-Talkhīṣ (Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalani), 227
Ṭalq b. ʿAlī, 221
al-Tamhīd (Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr), 227
Tanbīh al-ghāfilīn wa-tadhkirat al-ʿārifīn 
(Fatḥallāh Kāshānī), 154
Tanqīḥ Alfāẓ al-Jāmiʿ al-Ṣaḥīḥ (al-Zarkashī) 
287, 288f
Taqī al-Dīn Ibrāhīm al-Kafʿamī, 157
Taqī al-Dīn Nadwī, 217, 218
Taqrīb al-gharīb (Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī), 22
Tārīkh al-Ghurabāʾ (Abū Saʿīd b. Yūnus  
al-Ṣadafī), 91–2
Tārīkh Iṣfahān (Abū Nuʿaym al-Iṣfahānī), 
114
Tārīkh al-rusul wa-l-mulūk (al-Ṭabarī), 277
taṭbīq (adaptation), 254–7, 258–9
al-Tawḥīd (Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq), 155
Taʾwīl mukhtalif al-ḥadīth (Ibn Qutayba), 
18n, 23, 39
al-Taʿyīn fī sharḥ al-arbaʿīn (Najm al-Dīn 
Sulaymān b. ʿAbd al-Qawī b. ʿAbd  
al-Marīn al-Ṭūfī al-Ḥanbalī), 138
text reuse, 264, 269, 272–7 
texts
automated text analysis, 265 
religion, relationship with, 188
text reuse, 264, 269, 272–7 
Turkey, 188
theft, punishment for, 67
Theologia Aristotelis (pseudo-Aristotle), 165, 
175, 177–8
thoughts (khawāṭir), 168
al-Ṭibb (ʿAlī b. Mūsā al-Riḍā), 155–6
traditionalist attitude to akhbār al-āḥād, 50–1, 
54, 57
traditions, 50–1
translation, 188–90, 193–4, 195, 205, 286 

 308 
INDEX
transmission, 18, 59–60, 202–3, 246–7, 249 
language, 16 
‘on the authority of ’, 202, 203
transmission-based criticism (īlm al-
riwāya), 210, 211, 221, 223, 229, 241, 242
travel, 30–1
ṭūbā (blessed), 86
Tuḥfat dhawī al-adab (Jalāl al-Dīn al-Suyūṭī), 31
Tuḥfat dhawī al-arab fī mushkil al-asmāʾ 
wa-l-nasab (Nūr al-Dīn b. al-Khaṭīb 
al-Dahsha al-Ḥamawī), 31
Turkey, 194–5, 204
alphabet reform, 195
Diyanet (Directorate/Presidency of 
Religious Affairs), 187–8, 189, 190, 194, 
195, 197, 204  
education, 194–5
hadith study, 194–5
Yıldız Palace, 191–2
see also Ottoman Empire
Twelver Shīʿī legal school, 34–5 
al-ʿUdda fī uṣūl al-fiqh (al-Shaykh al-Ṭūsī), 60
ʿulamāʾ(civil officials), 33–4, 101
ʿUlamāʾ-Project, 26
ʿUmar b. ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz (caliph), 100
ʿUmdat al-qārī fī sharḥ Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī 
(Badr al-Dīn al-ʿAynī), 199, 200–1, 263, 
273, 274f, 275, 277
ʿUrwa b. al-Zubayr, 219
ʿUyūn akhbār al-Riḍā (Ibn Bābawayh [Ibn 
Bābūya al-Qummī] al-Shaykh al-Ṣadūq), 
266
Van Den Bossche, Gowaart, 275
vessels, 37, 40
vocabularies, 19
difficult, 63–5
vocalisation, 15, 16
al-Wāfī (Muḥsin Fayḍ Kāshānī), 161–2
‘al-Wajīza fī ʿilm al-dirāya’ (al-Shaykh Bahāʾ 
al-Dīn al-ʿĀmilī), 152–3
Wasāʾil al-shīʿa (al-Ḥurr al-ʿĀmilī), 161
women, 7–8, 290
writing, 151–2
Wuhayb b. al-Ward, 124
Yaḥyā b. ʿAlī al-Tibrīzī, 28, 30
Yaḥyā b. Muʿādh, 97
Yaḥyā b. Sharaf al-Nawawī, 190
Yaʿqūb b. Ḥumayd b. Kāsib, 87
Yazir, Elmalılı Muhammed Hamdi, 188
Yıldız Palace, 191–2
Yūsuf b. ʿAbdallāh al-Urmayūnī, 24
al-Zamakhsharī, 23, 27, 28, 30, 35, 40, 121, 
124
alcoholic beverages, 41–2
Zāriʿī, ‘Barrisī mabānī ʻAllāma Ṭabāṭabāʾī’, 
245
al-Zarkashī 287, 288f
Zayd b. ʿAmr b. Nawfal, 100
Zayn al-Dīn ʿAbd al-Raḥmān b. Aḥmad b. 
ʿAbd al-Raḥmān see Ibn Rajab
Zayn al-Dīn Sarīja b. Muḥammad b. Sarīja b. 
Aḥmad al-Malṭī al-Shāfiʿī, 138

 