
 MORE PRAISE FOR HADITH
 
‘It is impossible to understand the Islamic tradition without getting some knowledge of the
sciences of hadith. In this fascinating introduction, Jonathan A. C. Brown provides the reader
with the necessary means to navigate between the traditional framework and contemporary
issues. A brilliant essay written by a widely-acknowledged scholar in the field.’
Tariq Ramadan, Professor of Contemporary Islamic Studies, University of Oxford
 
‘A must read and a great read. The combination of impeccable, critical scholarship with a
storyteller’s style has produced an introductory volume that is both substantive and remarkably
engaging.’
John L. Esposito, Founding Director of the Center for Muslim-Christian Understanding,
Georgetown University
 
‘A comprehensive study of the scholarship throughout Islamic history dealing with the
traditions of the Prophet. A combination of critical analysis and informed understanding that
presents a significant new perspective on a much-debated subject.’
John O. Voll, Professor Emeritus of Islamic History, Georgetown University

 FOUNDATIONS of ISLAM
 
Series Editor: Omid Safi
 
Other Titles in this Series
 
Pilgrimage in Islam: Traditional and Modern Practices by Sophia Rose Arjana
The Qur’an: An Introduction by Anna M. Gade
Shar‘iah Law: An Introduction by Mohammad Hashim Kamali
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
 
Jonathan A. C. Brown is Associate Professor and Alwaleed bin Talal Chair of Islamic
Civilization at Georgetown University. He is the author of Misquoting Muhammad, which is
also published by Oneworld. He lives in Washington, DC.

 Hadith
Muhammad’s Legacy in the Medieval and Modern
World
 
JONATHAN A. C. BROWN
 
 

 ‘Whoever has preserved one life, it is as if he has saved all of humanity.’
Quran 5:32
 
To Julia Taft
My godmother and the noblest woman I have known …

 CONTENTS
Preface to the Revised Edition
Preface
Conventions, Abbreviations, and Transliteration
 
  1. The Prophet’s Words Then and Now: Hadith and Its Terminology
  2. The Transmission and Collection of Prophetic Traditions
  3. The Methods and History of Hadith Criticism
  4. Prophetic Traditions in Shiite Islam
  5. The Function of Prophetic Traditions in Islamic Law and Legal Theory
  6. The Function of Prophetic Traditions in Theology
  7. The Function of Prophetic Traditions in Sufism
  8. The Function of Prophetic Traditions in Politics
  9. The Authenticity Question: Western Debates over the Historical Reliability of Prophetic
Traditions
10. Debates over Prophetic Traditions in the Modern  Muslim World
11. Conclusion
 
Glossary
Bibliography
Illustrations
Acknowledgments

 PREFACE
The science of hadith is a noble one, and generations of scholars far, far more capable and
devoted than I have dedicated their lives to transmitting, analyzing, and sorting through the
legacy attributed to Muhammad. One could spend a lifetime reading the works of scholars like
al-Bukhārī, al-Dhahabī, and Ibn Hajar, and two lifetimes trying to keep up with them. Matching
their accomplishments is inconceivable to me. I can only hope that this book provides an
adequate introduction to their work and the influence it has had on Islamic civilization.
Students and colleagues always ask me whether the Sunni hadith tradition provides an
accurate representation of Muhammad’s teachings. In truth, I can only say that projects such as
this book are part of my search for the answer to that question. As the Chinese art collector Lu
Shih-hua (d. 1779 CE) once wrote, such matters ‘came to us from the ancients. The ancients
are gone, and we cannot raise them from the Nether World to question them. So how can we
arrive at the truth without being vain and false in our wrangling noisily about it?’1
 
Jonathan A. C. Brown
Khādim al-hadīth al-sharīf
Sana, Yemen, 2007
ENDNOTE
1 Wen Fong, ‘The Problem of Forgery in Chinese Painting: Part One,’ p. 99.

 CONVENTIONS, ABBREVIATIONS, AND TRANSLITERATION
Dates in this book will follow the Hijrī/Common Era format, where the first date (the Hijrī
date) is that of the Islamic lunar calendar, which begins with Muhammad’s emigration to
Medina in 1/622. Obviously, pre-Islamic dates will follow the standard Before Common Era
(BCE) and Common Era (CE) dating system. After the 1700s CE we no longer include Hijrī
dates as they serve little use after that point.
Abbreviations used in this book include ‘b.’ for the Arabic ‘ibn,’ or ‘son of …’, and (s) for
the honorific Arabic phrase ‘May the peace and blessings of God be upon him (sallā Allāh
‘alayhi wa sallam),’ which is commonly said and written after Muhammad’s name.
The transliteration characters in this book represent the long vowels in Arabic and Persian:
ā, ī, and ū. The ’ character represents a simple glottal stop, like the initial sounds of both
syllables in ‘uh oh.’ The ‘ symbol indicates the Arabic letter ‘ayn, a sound that resembles the
‘Aaah’ noise a person makes when getting their throat checked by the doctor. In Arabic and
Persian words, ‘q’ represents a voiceless uvular sound produced at the back of the throat and
is non-existent in English. One could most closely approximate this sound with the ‘c’ sound at
the beginning of the crow noise ‘caw! caw!’ ‘Gh’ indicates a sound similar to the French ‘r’,
and ‘kh’ represents a velar fricative like the sound of clearing one’s throat. ‘Dh’ indicates the
‘th’ sound in words like ‘that’ or ‘bother.’ ‘Th’ represents the ‘th’ sound in words like ‘bath.’

 PREFACE TO THE REVISED EDITION
It has been almost ten years since I wrote the preface to the first edition of this book, sitting in
an upper-floor room in a house in Sana, the red and orange light bathing the battered furniture
through colored glass. How much the world has changed, how much people have suffered, and
how many of the pillars of my own world have fallen. Sana is bombed and besieged. Its
already impoverished people starve. Syria lies in ruins beyond tragedy. Egypt, the place I felt
most at home, has mutated from the warm and open world of deep knowledge that drew me in,
to a kitschy-dark caricature of mid-twentieth-century fascism. Those Egyptian scholars from
whom I had benefited and learned so much have either died or become loyal servants of a
dictatorship that only fools and the myopically vicious could embrace.
So then either my teachers were fools, in which case, does the knowledge they imparted to so
many have any value? Or they were vicious, in which case, can such a vessel truly carry ‘this
knowledge, which is religion,’ without sullying it? How does one make sense of things when
one’s exemplars make choices that seem so profoundly wrong? I’ve long pondered this, and the
answer I’m led to again and again is both comforting and supremely disturbing.
The political sphere appears of supreme import. Men triumph or are humiliated or killed;
innocent women and children suffer unspeakable abuse; war is fought, peace is made,
prosperity nurtured or squandered. But in the vaulted chamber of ideas, of knowledge, this
sphere occupies just a portion of one of many shelves. Some who have brought great misery in
human history have aimed only at satisfying themselves, but far more have been pursuing the
same abstract goods as their righteous, often martyred, opponents. Bond villains are often very
well intentioned. Political trauma, as total as it is, is created less by ideas than by their
interpretation and implementation. Like all those who have reflected on human polity, my
teachers valued both justice and order. But order had priority for them. Others would put
justice first. This is a question of priority, and it has consequences. But, phrased like this in the
abstract, reasonable people can disagree. And in that small space of disagreement the
dimensions of our world are warped in inversion, and endless wrongs and suffering are
inflicted. All on part of one shelf in the great library of our human heritage and its divine
inspiration.
As impossible as it seems, as impossible as it is for me, we must keep our political
disagreements in perspective. A report in Sahih al-Bukhārī describes how, as Islam’s first,
bloody civil war erupted, there was a diplomatic meeting. On one side was ‘Ammār bin Yāsir,
who would soon die in the war, and on the other Abū Mūsā and Abū Mas‘ūd. The two men say
to ‘Ammār, ‘In all the time since you’ve been Muslim, we haven’t seen you undertake anything
more distasteful to us than your haste in this matter.’ ‘Ammār replies, ‘And I haven’t seen from
you two, since the time you became Muslims, anything more distasteful to me than your
hesitation on this matter.’ Then Abū Mas‘ūd dresses each of the other two in robes, and they all
head off to the mosque for prayer.1
Enough serious talk! What does this new edition have that the old one doesn’t? First, I’ve

 fixed as many of the errors or oversights as possible. Second, it includes an entirely new
chapter on the role of hadith in politics. Third, I’ve significantly expanded the section on the
development of the Western Historical Critical Method in Chapter 9. I’ve also added a new
case study on hadith authentication at the end of Chapter 3. Finally, I’ve replaced some of the
examples and case studies throughout the book with new ones that are either more varied or
more interesting.
 
Jonathan A. C. Brown
Khādim al-hadīth al-sharīf
Istanbul, 2017
ENDNOTE
1 Sahīh al-Bukhārī: kitāb al-fitan, bāb 19.
 

 1
THE PROPHET’S WORDS THEN AND NOW: HADITH AND ITS
TERMINOLOGY
‘We have a question,’ the man said, his rural accent betraying the long trip he must have made
from his provincial hamlet to the metropolis of Cairo. ‘We have built a school for boys and
girls,’ the man continued, sitting cross-legged on the carpet with his eyes angled reverently
upward at the scholar seated in the sturdy wooden chair before him. ‘But some members of our
community say that we cannot allow the girls to attend because they will mix with the boys in
the hallways. Are we allowed to open the school?’ The man waited anxiously, as did the
students seated deferentially around the scholar, I among them. The fall of 2003 was unusually
hot, and the hesitant breezes that penetrated the wooden lattice walls were welcomed by all.
The scholar, a middle-aged man who would soon be elevated to one of the most influential
religious positions in the Sunni Muslim world, the chief jurisconsult (muftī) of Egypt, leaned
down towards the tape recorder that the man had dragged with him on his long journey. ‘Do
you have the Nile down where you are?’ the scholar asked. ‘Yes,’ the man replied. ‘Listen,
then, whoever you are who objects to opening this school to girls,’ the scholar said into the
recorder, ‘go throw yourself in the Nile! For did the Messenger of God, may the peace and
blessings of God be upon him, not say “Do not prevent the female servants of God from the
mosques of God”?’1
For over a thousand years Muslim peasants, merchants, and princes have flocked to the
vaulted rooms that line the great courtyard of Cairo’s al-Azhar Mosque to seek the counsel of
the ulema, those scholars who define Islamic faith and religious law. Seated in this courtyard
on a fall day in 2003, the future ‘Grand Mufti of the Egyptian Lands’ could look back on over
fourteen hundred years of the Islamic religious tradition, that corpus of scholarship that
elucidated the message brought by Muhammad and is one of the world’s most elaborate and
rich intellectual edifices. In responding to the question of this simple man, the mufti could draw
from the capacious tradition of Islamic legal discourse: the bodies of law of the four major
Sunni legal schools, the obscure opinions of medieval scholars long eclipsed by time, or the
general principles that governed Islamic law and its derivation.
Although his mind was no doubt scanning this abundant legal heritage as he pondered the
man’s question, the scholar did not reply with any high legal language or dry legal ruling.
Instead, he answered the man with the words of a figure whom Muslims are taught from
childhood to love and venerate as a moral exemplar and object of devotion, a person ‘dearer
to them than their own child or parents.’i The scholar reached back through the centuries to the
words of the Prophet Muhammad, words that he knew would resonate in this simple man’s
heart as clearly as the day they were first spoken and would lay all the concerns of his rural
community to rest. Even amid the confusion of the modern world, today as before, ‘the Prophet
of God is most worthy of being followed.’2

 Muhammad’s precedent has been invoked in places and times far distant from the Nile
Valley. His words speak with compelling power throughout the Muslim world, among Sunnis
and Shiites alike. A year after I had heard the future ‘Grand Mufti of the Egyptian Lands’ issue
his opinion, I sat in the lush courtyard of the Khan Madrasa in the ancient Persian city of
Shiraz, discussing issues of Islamic thought with an Imami Shiite cleric. As the morning sun
shone on the intricate floral tiles of the mosque’s vaulted enclosure, we were debating whether
or not ‘Alī, the Prophet’s son-in-law and well-spring of the Shiite tradition, possessed
revealed knowledge of future events. ‘The Commander of the Faithful, ‘Alī, may God’s
blessings be upon him, knew that oil would be found in these lands and that “steel birds would
fly”,’ the Shiite cleric expounded energetically. ‘This knowledge he got from the Messenger of
God, his teacher, for did the Messenger not say, “I am the city of knowledge and ‘Alī is its
gate. So whoever seeks knowledge let him approach it by its gate”?’3
Among Western readership, the question ‘What does Islam say about’ some issue is usually
followed by reference to the Quran. A Western journalist writing about the dress habits of
Egyptian women informs us that wearing the headscarf is not an injunction from the Quran,4
while pundits discussing jihad note that the Quran says ‘slay the unbelievers wherever you find
them’ (Quran 9:5). Certainly, to Muslims the Quran is the literal word of God. It is a text
revered to such an extent that many Muslims memorize it in its entirety as children, and many
Muslims believe that a state of ritual purity is required to touch its pages.
Yet the Quran is not the source to which a curious reader should refer in order to answer the
question ‘What does Islam say about’ a particular issue. The Quran is not a book of law, and
many tenets of Islamic theology are never mentioned in the holy book. To consult the Quran is
only to get part of the picture. Large portions of the Islamic legal, theological, and popular
religious traditions come not from the book that Muslims hold to be God’s revelation, but
rather from the legacy of Muhammad, whom they believe God chose to explain and elucidate
His message through word and deed. It is in his teachings that we find Muslim dress codes as
well as the rules and restrictions for holy war.
The normative legacy of the Prophet is known as the Sunna, and, although it stands second to
the Quran in terms of reverence, it is the lens through which the holy book is interpreted and
understood. In this sense, in Islamic civilization the Sunna has ruled over the Quran, shaping,
specifying, and adding to the revealed book. Understanding how the message of Islam spread
outward from Arabia in the seventh century and how it nurtured the various legal, theological,
mystical, and cultural dimensions of Islamic civilization must begin with the study of the
heritage left by Muhammad.
For much of Islamic history, the unit through which the Sunna was preserved, transmitted, and
understood has been the hadīth (Arabic plural, ahādīth), or a report describing the words,
actions, or habits of the Prophet. Unlike the Quran, the hadiths were not quickly and concisely
compiled during and immediately after Muhammad’s life. Because hadiths were recorded and
transmitted over a period of decades and even centuries, they are not in and of themselves
contemporary historical documentation of what Muhammad said and did. In the century after
the Prophet’s mission, the Muslim community passed through no less than three civil wars and

 numerous sectarian schisms. As a result, hadiths were forged by different parties trying to
manipulate the authority of the Sunna. The question of the authenticity of hadiths and how one
can distinguish true ones from forgeries has been a perennial concern to both the Muslim
scholars who turned to the Sunna to elaborate the Islamic tradition and Western scholars who
have studied it.
The tool that Muslim scholars developed to help ensure the authenticity of hadiths was the
isnād (Arabic, ‘support’), or the chain of transmitters through which a scholar traced the matn,
or text, of a hadith back to the Prophet. The isnād was an effort to document that a hadith had
actually come from Muhammad, and Muslim scholars from the eighth century until today have
never ceased repeating the mantra ‘The isnād is part of the religion – if not for the isnād,
whoever wanted could say whatever they wanted.’
The Prophet’s words, however, have always been more than just a type of proof used in
discussions of Islamic law and dogma. The isnād and the hadith it transmits have been more
than fodder for debates over authenticity and means of establishing it. For the Muslim scholarly
class, the ulema, tracing the isnād of a hadith back to Muhammad is to follow one’s genealogy
of sacred knowledge back to its source. It is a medium of connection to the Prophet, ‘the
beloved of God,’ and a link to the scholarly titans of the past. Even today, reciting one’s isnād
is to walk back in memory through the pantheon corridor of great scholars whose labors had
built up Islamic tradition. The students who sat gathered around the future Mufti of Egypt on
that hot fall day in Cairo had each folded gingerly a piece of paper listing the scholar’s isnād
back to the earliest hadith collection, the Muwatta’ of Mālik b. Anas (d. 179/796), and from
that eighth-century author through his isnāds back to the Prophet. Each paper stated that the
Mufti had given these students permission to transmit the hadiths in the collection via his isnād.
By hearing this book of hadiths through the Mufti’s chain of transmission, these students had
become part of the timeless tradition of passing knowledge from one generation to the next.
For over a thousand years, Muslim students, ‘the seekers of knowledge,’ have traveled from
city to city in the Muslim world to hear hadiths recited by master scholars, receive their
permission to transmit them, and be incorporated into the living isnād tradition. In the summer
of 2007 I traveled from Egypt across the Red Sea to the sweltering, sandy coastal plain of
Tihama in Yemen. There I made my way inland to the ancient trading city of Zabid, its
whitewashed brick walls and dust-blown winding alleys seemingly immune to the passage of
time. Over the centuries, this city had more than any other place in the Muslim world preserved
the tradition of narrating hadiths by full isnāds back to Muhammad. In an old madrasa I found
the mufti of the city seated on one of the high wicker beds so common to the region, surrounded
by his students. The mufti set down the book he was explaining, and the students stared
inquisitively as he asked who I was and why I had come. ‘To hear a hadith through your isnād,
the isnād of the people of Zabid, O virtuous teacher,’ I replied. After hearing my request, the
mufti agreed to recite the hadith that a scholar must always give his students first. ‘Write this
down,’ the mufti instructed, ‘and do not forget us in your most sincere prayers’:
 
I, Muhammad ‘Alī al-Battāh of the Ahdal clan, heard from my teacher Ahmad son of Dāwūd al-Battāh, who heard from
his teacher the Mufti Sulaymān son of Muhammad al-Ahdal, from Muhammad son of ‘Abd al-Bāqī al-Ahdal, from

 Muhammad son of ‘Abd al-Rahmān al-Ahdal, from the Mufti ‘Abd al-Rahmān son of Sulaymān al-Ahdal, from his father
Sulaymān son of Yahyā al-Ahdal, from Abū Bakr al-Ahdal, from Ahmad al-Ahdal, from the Pillar of Islam, Yahyā son of
Umar al-Ahdal, from Abū Bakr al-Battāh, from Yūsuf son of Muhammad al-Battāh, from Tāhir son of Husayn al-Ahdal,
from the hadith master Ibn Dayba‘, from the sheik Zayn al-Dīn al-Sharijī of Zabid, from Nafīs al-Dīn Sulaymān al-‘Alawī,
from ‘Alī son of Shaddād, from the imam Ahmad the Candlemaker, from his father Sharaf al-Dīn the Candlemaker, from
Zāhir son of Rustum of Esfahan, from ‘Abd al-Malik of Karūkh, from Abū Nasr son of Muhammad of Herat, from Abū
Muhammad ‘Abd al-Jabbār al-Jarrāh of Merv, from Abū al-‘Abbās Muhammad son of Ahmad of Merv, from the definitive
hadith master Muhammad son of ‘Īsā of Tirmiz, from Ibn Abī ‘Umar, from Ibn ‘Uyayna, from ‘Amr son of Dīnār, from
Abū Qābūs, from ‘Abdallāh son of ‘Amr, from the Messenger of God, who said, ‘The merciful, indeed the Most
Merciful God has mercy upon them. Have mercy in this earthly world, and He that is in the heavens will have
mercy on you.’5
THE CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK
This book is an introduction to the hadith tradition, its collection, its criticism, its functions in
Islamic civilization and the controversies surrounding it to this day. This present chapter will
introduce you to some crucial terminology for the study of hadiths. In Chapter 2, we will
discuss the collection and transmission of hadiths in Sunni Islam, as well as the various genres
of hadith literature that developed from the early Islamic period until modern times. Chapter 3
will explain the science of hadith criticism developed by Sunni scholars and the various
debates and developments that affected it throughout Islamic history. Chapter 4 looks at the
hadith traditions of Imami and Zaydi Shiism as well as their interaction with that of Sunni
Islam. Chapter 5 explores the functions of hadiths in Islamic law and legal theory, and Chapter
6 investigates the role of hadiths in elaborating Islamic theology. Chapter 7 tackles the
important functions of hadiths in the Islamic mystical tradition, commonly known as Sufism.
Chapter 8 looks at the role of hadiths in Islamic political thought and contemporary
controversies. Chapter 9 turns away from Muslim discourse on hadiths to trace the Western
academic study of hadiths and Western debates over their historical reliability. Finally,
Chapter 10 explores debates among modern Muslims over the reliability of hadiths and their
proper role in understanding Islam today.
WHAT IS A HADITH? CRUCIAL TERMINOLOGY AND EXAMPLES OF HADITHS
The Prophet Muhammad’s mission lasted twenty-three years, from 610 CE when he announced
to his wife that he had received a reve-lation from God through the Angel Gabriel in a cave
outside Mecca, to his death in 632 CE as the head of the powerful Islamic state in Medina.
During his career as a prophet and leader, there was no courtroom stenographer assiduously
recording his every word and furnishing an official transcript of his orders, religious edicts, or
everyday speech. Instead, the generation of Muslims who lived with the Prophet, known as the
Companions (Arabic: Sahāba), sought to preserve Muhammad’s words and deeds either in
their memories or through some means of writing, passing these recollections on to others.
These reports were passed on from generation to generation, in oral and/or written form, until
scholars compiled them in permanent collections.
Each hadith, or report about the Prophet, consists of a text (matn) describing his words or
actions, and a chain of transmission (isnād) by which this report was communicated. Clearly,

 more than one Companion could report the Prophet saying or doing something, or a Companion
could recount this report to more than one person. This would result in more than one chain of
transmission for the report. We must thus distinguish between an instance of the Prophet
speaking or acting, which we will refer to either by its Arabic term ‘hadith’ or by the term
‘tradition,’ and the various chains of transmission of this tradition.
As in a game of ‘Telephone,’ a report could mutate as it was passed from person to person.
As we know from our own daily lives, reports could also be repeated in expanded or
contracted form depending on context. Each of these varying transmissions of the tradition we
will call a narration of the hadith. For example, it is transmitted from the Companion
‘Abdallāh b. al-Zubayr that the Prophet said, ‘Whoever misrepresents me, let him prepare
for himself a seat in Hellfire.’6 But the mainstream narrations of this tradition, from many
Companions such as Anas b. Mālik, Ibn Mas‘ūd and Abū Hurayra, quote the Prophet as saying
‘Whoever misrepresents me intentionally, let him prepare for himself a seat in Hellfire.’
Here we see how two narrations of one Prophetic tradition differ in an important way.
The following are some examples of hadiths addressing a range of legal, ritual, theological,
and ethical topics from the major sects of Islam. From the most revered Sunni hadith
collection, the Sahīh of al-Bukhārī (d. 256/870), we find a hadith that served as evidence in
Islamic theological debates over whether believers will meet God on the Day of Judgment:
 
Al-Bukhārī writes: it was narrated to us by Yūsuf b. Mūsā: it was narrated to us by Abū Usāma: it was narrated to me by
al-A‘mash, from Khaythama, from the Companion ‘Adī b. Hātim, who said that:
 
The Messenger of God, may God’s peace and blessings be upon him, said, ‘There is not one among you except that he
will be spoken to directly by his Lord with no translator or any barrier separating them.’7
 
From the Sunan of the Sunni scholar Abū Dāwūd al-Sijistānī (d. 275/889), this hadith was
used to help derive Islamic laws on taxation:
 
Abū Dāwūd writes: it was narrated to us by Muhammad b. Dāwūd b. Sufyān: it was narrated to us by Yahyā b. Hassān: it
was narrated to us by Sulaymān b. Mūsā: it was narrated to us by Ja‘far b. Sa‘d: it was narrated to me by Khubayb b.
Sulaymān, from his father, from the Companion Samura b. Jundub, who said [in a speech]:
 
Indeed the Messenger of God, may the peace and blessings of God be upon him, would order us to pay the
charity tax on things that we were preparing for sale.8
 
From the Mu‘jam al-saghīr of the Sunni scholar al-Tabarānī (d. 360/971) we find a hadith that
indicates both Muhammad’s character and the permissibility of lending items:
 
Al-Tabarānī writes: it was narrated to us by Ahmad b. Mansūr al-Jundīsābūrī: it was narrated to us by ‘Alī b. Harb: it was
reported to us by Ash‘ath b. ‘Attāf, from ‘Abdallāh b. Habīb, from al-Sha‘bī, from the Companion Jābir b. ‘Abdallāh, that:
 
The Messenger of God bought a camel from me and then let me ride it back to the city.9
 
From the Amālī of the famous Imami Shiite scholar Ibn Bābawayh (d. 381/991) we find a

 hadith that emphasizes two important themes in Islamic legal and theological discourse: first,
religion is not the purview of personal opinion, and, second, God is not to be compared to
created beings:
 
Ibn Bābawayh writes: it was narrated to us by Muhammad b. Mūsā b. al-Mutawakkil: it was narrated to us by ‘Alī b.
Ibrāhīm b. Hāshim: it was narrated by his father, from al-Rayyān b. al-Salt, from the Imam ‘Alī b. Mūsā al-Ridā, from his
father, from his forefathers, from the Commander of the Faithful ‘Alī b. Abī Tālib, that:
 
The Messenger of God, may God’s peace and blessings be upon him, said, ‘God said, “He does not believe in Me who
interprets My speech [in the Quran] with merely his own opinion. He has not known Me who compares Me
with My creation, and he is not in My religion who uses analogical reasoning [in questions of law] in My
religion.” ’10
 
Finally, in the Amālī al-sughrā of the Zaydi Shiite scholar Ahmad b. al-Husayn al-Hārūnī (d.
421/1030) we find a hadith describing the way in which a pious Muslim should view death:
 
Al-Hārūnī writes: It was reported to us by Abū al-Husayn al- Burūjirdī: it was narrated to us by Abū al-Qāsim al-Baghawī:
it was narrated to us by Hudba: it was narrated to us by Hammām, from Qatāda, from the Companion Anas, from the
Companion ‘Ubāda b. al-Sāmit, that:
 
The Messenger of God, may the peace and blessings of God be upon him, said: ‘He who would love to encounter God,
God loves encountering him. And he who would dislike encountering God, God dislikes encountering him.’ So
Aisha, or another one of the Prophet’s wives, asked, ‘O Messenger of God, but indeed we dislike death.’ The
Prophet replied, ‘It is not like that, but rather the believer, when death comes to him, he receives the glad
tidings of God’s pleasure and His munificence. So that there is nothing dearer to the believer than what lies
ahead of him. Thus he wants to encounter God, and God wants to encounter him. But the unbeliever, when
death comes to him, he receives tidings of God’s displeasure and His impending punishment. So there is
nothing more hated to him than what lies ahead. Thus he despises meeting God, and God despises meeting
him.’ 11
THE NATURE OF MUHAMMAD’S AUTHORITY IN ISLAM
The role of the Prophet Muhammad as a teacher, role model, and living example of the
revelation he delivered is discussed in the Quran.ii The holy book repeatedly instructs Muslims
to ‘Obey God and His prophet’ (Quran 8:1), adding that he was for the Muslims ‘a most goodly
example’ (Quran 33:21). Although the Quran reiterates that Muhammad is nothing but a mortal
who has merely been favored with direct communication from God, Muslims consider him
above any ethical shortcomings. There has been disagreement among Shiite and Sunni Muslims
as well as within the two sects as to the degree to which prophets in general are immune from
sin, but Muslims agree that after the beginning of his prophetic mission Muhammad was
incapable of any serious sin or moral failing. In fact, reports of rare errors or instances of
forgetfulness on his part are treated as part of the Prophet’s teachings. The Quran, for example,
reprimands Muhammad for turning away in frustration from a blind Muslim who distracted him
with a question when he was busy negotiating with his Meccan opponents. The Quran uses this
as an opportunity to remind the Muslims that one should not prefer influential infidels over
sincere, if tactless, believers (Quran 80:1–7). There is even a hadith in which the Prophet
states, ‘Indeed I forget or am made to forget so that I may furnish the Sunna.’12 Hadiths

 about mistakes that Muhammad made in prayers, for example, Muslims treat as instructions on
how to act when they themselves make those errors.iii
No traditional Muslim scholar would ever consider it possible that the Prophet had made a
statement or acted out of anger or weakness. When opponents of the Muslims mocked the
Companion ‘Abdallāh b. ‘Amr for recording everything the Prophet said, Muhammad
comforted him by saying ‘Write it down, for by Him whose hand holds my soul, nothing
comes out of my mouth but the truth.’13 As the Quran states, Muhammad ‘does not speak out
of his own desires, it is but revelation revealed’ (Quran 53:3–4).
As a mere mortal, Muslims believe that Muhammad had no independent ability to prophesy.
He was simply a medium for God’s reve-lation. Hence, he is made to say in the Quran, ‘I do
not know what will be done with me or with you. I do but follow what is revealed to me’
(Quran 46:9). But Muslims believe that Muhammad did have access to direct knowledge of the
future from God in both the formal revelation of the Quran, which predicts events like Muslim
victories over their Meccan opponents, and in private inspirations made known to him alone.
Many hadiths therefore describe future events such as the moral decline of humanity or the
events that will precede the Day of Judgment. In one famous hadith, the Prophet states that
‘there will not come upon you a time except that the eras coming after it will be worse
than it.’14
Hadiths could describe the Prophet’s authoritative legacy in three possible ways: they could
communicate Muhammad’s words, or his actions, or describe things done in his presence to
which he did not object. The above hadith examples describe Muhammad’s edicts and
normative behavior. But Muslim scholars also assumed that anything done during the Prophet’s
time that he did not forbid must have been acceptable. The Companion Jābir b. ‘Abdallāh thus
reported, ‘We used to practice coitus interruptus during the time of the Prophet when the
Quran was being revealed.’15 Muslim scholars thus interpreted this as a major proof for the
permissibility of birth control in Islam.
Although a hadith could refer to any aspect of the Prophet’s life and legacy, not everything the
Prophet did was authoritative. The Prophet was forty years old when he received his first
revelation. Although Muhammad was admired for his upstanding character and integrity even
before his mission, Muslims do not consider his teachings authoritative before he received
God’s sanction. In addition, revelation had not made the Prophet a master of all trades. In one
famous hadith, the Prophet came across some farmers trying to graft small date palms. When he
suggested that the farmers take a different course of action and that advice proved wrong, he
replied, ‘I am but a man, if I give you a command regarding religion then take it. But if I
make a statement out of my own judgment, then I am but a man ... you are more
knowledgeable about the matters of your world.’16
The scope of what concerns ‘religion’ in the Islamic tradition, however, is much wider than
in the modern Western world. Although the Prophet consulted his Companions on affairs of
state, governance, and military tactics (in fact, on several occasions the Quran validated his
Companions’ opinions rather than his own), his decisions as a statesman and military leader
have been considered authoritative by Muslim jurists. Were his decisions, after all, not

 ultimately guided by God?
Certainly, not all aspects of the Prophet’s behavior required imitation or obedience. Since the
Prophet did not state, for example, that wearing the long robes of an Arab was required dress
for a Muslim, this has been viewed as a matter of choice. Injunctions by the Prophet
encouraging Muslim men to grow beards, however, have led Muslim jurists to view this as
either a requirement or laudable behavior. And while such factors limited the extent to which
the Prophet’s personal tastes and habits were legally compelling, there has been no limit to
optional imitation of the Prophet done out of supererogatory piety. Some Muslims thus
replicate even the mundane aspects of the Prophet’s behavior, such as the position in which he
slept and the food he ate. The famous jurist and hadith scholar of Baghdad, Ibn Hanbal (d.
241/855), once claimed that he had acted on every hadith he had heard about the Prophet at
least once.17
THE NATURE OF PROPHETIC SPEECH: PREACHER VS. LAWYER
In a 2012 study, a computer-run stylistic analysis of the Quran and a selection of hadiths
demonstrated that the Quran and the hadiths come from two different speakers.18 That is not
surprising. What is interesting is that the study shows a stylistic consistency in the language of
the hadith corpus. There has always been disagreement over whether the orthodox collections
of hadiths in Islam represent an intact record of the Prophet Muhammad’s words. But whether
they actually came from the Prophet’s mouth or not, there is certainly a Prophetic style of
Arabic expression, one that anyone who reads even a small selection of hadiths quickly
notices.
One of the most striking features of the Prophetic style in hadiths is the frequency of
hyperbole. In one hadith the Prophet states, ‘Cursing a Muslim is iniquity and fighting one is
unbelief (kufr).’ In another he says, ‘No one will enter Heaven who has even a grain’s
weight of pride in his heart,’ and in another hadith he declares, ‘One who cheats is not from
among us.’ These are all dramatic statements, but the way in which Muslim scholars have
understood them has differed dramatically from their evident meaning.
By the time hadiths were being collected systematically in the eighth century, Muslim
scholars had already developed filters for translating such hyperbole into legal or theological
statements. These filters were needed because the Quran, other reliable hadiths, and overall
Muslim practice made it clear that interpreting such hadiths literally was a grave error.
‘Fighting a Muslim’ was not unbelief (kufr) in the same way that renouncing Islam or atheism
were. Rather, as early Muslims explained, it was a ‘lesser form of unbelief (kufr dūn kufr)’ or
the type of act that an unbeliever would do. This was clear from explanations of the hadith by
Companions and also from other hadiths in which the Prophet implied that a murderer
remained Muslim. The ban on those ‘with a grain’s weight of pride in their hearts’ from
entering Heaven was only temporary, since sound hadiths explained that anyone ‘with even a
grain’s weight of faith in their heart’ will eventually be allowed to exit Hellfire and enter
Paradise. Early Muslim scholars realized that the Prophet’s phrase ‘not from among us’ did not
mean that someone was not Muslim. Rather, it meant that a certain action or characteristic was

 ‘not part of our Sunna’ or not the conduct of a good Muslim.19
The sheer range and detail of material included in the hadith corpus makes it clear that it was
meant to provide guidance for the details of daily life. But it also seems clear from how
widespread hyperbole was in the corpus of Prophetic speech that its original function was also
exhortation, preaching, and delivering unambiguous moral messages. As much as Muslim
scholars have had to apply filters to the hadith corpus in order to mine it for clear rules of law
or dogma, they also appreciated its exhortative dimension. Hadiths were and remain teaching
tools. So, while many early Muslim scholars were careful to filter out the hyperbole when
explaining hadiths to people, others, like the Meccan scholar Ibn ‘Uyayna (d. 196/811),
delivered them unfiltered to audiences so that the morals embedded in them would sink in.
THE SCOPE OF THE BOOK: WHAT DEFINES HADITH LITERATURE?
Stories and reports about the Prophet Muhammad permeate all genres of scholarship and
expression in Islamic civilization. Hadiths appear in books of law, theology, Quranic
commentary, mysticism, politics, Arabic grammar, history, and etiquette. If we are to be
introduced to the hadith tradition, how do we define its scope?
Early Islamic writing combined both pre-Islamic Arab sensitivities and new Islamic
concerns. Muslim authors of the eighth and ninth centuries expressed the tribal nature of Arab
and early Islamic society by writing books of genealogy (ansāb), such as the Kitāb al-ansāb of
Ibn al-Kalbī (d. 204/819). Other early Muslims gathered and recorded religious folklore from
Arab, Jewish, Persian, and Christian sources. The Yemeni Wahb b. Munabbih (d. 114/732)
was one of the most famous authors in this genre, which became known as ‘stories of the
prophets (qasas al-anbiyā’).’ Other early authors collected information about the military
campaigns of the early Muslim community and traced its historical course. This genre was
known as ‘campaigns (maghāzī)’ and ‘historical reports (tārīkh or akhbār),’ including such
works as the Maghāzī of Mūsā b. ‘Uqba (d. 141/758). Another import-ant genre combined
these fields: the study of the Prophet’s biography, or sīra. The most famous biography of
Muhammad is the Sīra of Ibn Ishāq (d. 150/767). Some early Muslim scholars concentrated on
collecting reports about the meaning and contexts of Quranic verses, compiling exegetical
books called ‘tafsīr.’ Finally, some scholars turned their attention to reports of the Prophet’s
legal, ritual, and theological statements. These were known as ‘rulings (ahkām)’ and formed
the core of the hadith tradition.
The defining characteristic of hadith literature as it emerged in the mid eighth century was
that it consisted of reports attributed to Muhammad and transmitted by full isnāds from him.
Books of Quranic exegesis, history, genealogy, and folklore often included reports from
Muhammad or describing his actions. But these represented the minority of their contents.
Quranic exegesis most often relied on the opinions of Companions or later Muslims for the
meaning of Quranic words. History works frequently described events that occurred decades
after Muhammad’s death, such as the Muslim conquests of Syria and Iran. Stories of the
prophets involved subjects as distant as Adam and Eve. These genres were distinct from
ahkām and the nascent hadith tradition because they were not focused on the persona of

 Muhammad.
But what about sīra, the biography of the Prophet? By definition, this was focused on
Muhammad. Here, the second defining characteristic of hadith literature proves key: the isnād.
The Sīra of Ibn Ishāq rarely includes full isnāds for the stories it tells about the Prophet or its
quotations of his words. The isnāds that it does include are often incomplete, meaning that the
sources that transmitted the report are often omitted or left unnamed.
It was the presence of full isnāds leading back to the Prophet and transmitting his legacy that
defined the core of hadith literature, what early hadith scholars called the genre of ‘supported
reports (al-musnadāt).’ Of course, if we open up famous hadith collections such as the Sahīh
of al-Bukhārī, we find chapters on Quranic exegesis (tafsīr) and the Prophet’s campaigns
(maghāzī). What distinguishes these chapters from separate books of tafsīr or maghāzī,
however, is that the chapters of hadith books focus on reports with full isnāds that quote the
Prophet instead of later Muslims.
Regardless of their precise subject, any books in Islamic civil-ization that include hadiths
with full isnāds back to the Prophet are subsumed under the genre of hadith literature. Of
course, later books of hadiths written after the use of isnāds became obsolete or books
specifically discussing or analyzing aspects of hadiths may not provide full isnāds, but their
subject matter clearly places them in this genre as well.
ENDNOTES
 1
J. Brown, field notes, Sept. 2003.
 2
This quote is attributed to the famous ninth-century scholar al-Shāfi‘ī.
 3
J. Brown, field notes, July 2004.
 4
See Max Rodenbeck’s excellent book, Cairo: the City Victorious, p. 111.
 5
J. Brown, field notes July 2007. This hadith can be found in Muhammad b. ‘Īsā al-Tirmidhī, Jāmi‘ al-Tirmidhī: kitāb al-birr wa al-sila,
bāb mā jā’a fī rahmat al-muslimīn.
 6
Muhammad b. Ismā‘īl al-Bukhārī, Sahīh al-Bukhārī: kitāb al-‘ilm, bāb man kadhaba ‘alā al-Nabī.
 7
Sahīh al-Bukhārī: kitāb al-tawhīd, bāb qawl Allāh ‘wujūhuhum yawma’idhin nādira.’
 8
Abū Dāwūd al-Sijistānī, Sunan Abī Dāwūd: kitāb al-zakāt, bāb al-‘urūd idhā kānat li’l-tijāra hal fīhā min zakāt.
 9
Abū al-Qāsim al-Tabarānī, al-Mu‘jam al-saghīr, vol. 1, p. 76.
10 Ibn Bābawayh, Amālī al-Sadūq, p. 6.
11 Ahmad b. al-Husayn al-Hārūnī, al-Amālī al-sughrā, p. 8; Sahīh al-Bukhārī: kitāb al-riqāq, bāb man ahabba liqā’ Allāh ….
12 Muwatta’: kitāb al-sahw.
13 ‘Abdallāh b. Abd al-Rahmān al-Dārimī, Sunan al-Dārimī: introductory chapters, bāb man rakhkhasa fī kitābat al-‘ilm.
14 Sahīh al-Bukhārī: kitāb al-fitan, bāb lā ya’tī zamān illā alladhī ba‘dahu sharr minhu.
15 Sahīh al-Bukhārī: kitāb al-nikāh, bāb al-‘azl.
16 Muslim b. al-Hajjāj, Sahīh Muslim: kitāb al-fadā’il, bāb wujūb imtithāl mā qālahu shar‘an. See also Sunan Abī Dāwūd: kitāb al-qadā’,
bāb fī qadā’ al-qādī idhā akhta’a.
17 For the issue of beards, see Sahīh al-Bukhārī: kitāb al-libās, bāb taqlīm al-azfār. Al-Khatīb, al-Jāmi‘, vol. 1, p. 225.
18 Halim Sayoud, ‘Author discrimination between the Holy Quran and the Prophet’s statements,’ pp. 427–444.
19 Jāmi‘ al-Tirmidhī: kitāb al-īmān, bāb mā jā’a fī sibāb al-muslim; kitāb al-birr wa’l-sila, bāb mā jā’a fī al-kibr, bāb mā jā’a fī rahmat
al-sibyān; Sunan of Abū Dāwūd: kitāb al-ijāra, bāb al-nahy ‘an al-ghishsh; Ibn Hajar, Fath al-Bārī, vol. 13, pp. 30, 33.
 
i  See the hadith ‘None of you truly believes until I am dearer to him than his child, his parent and the people altogether’: Ahmad
b. Shu‘ayb al-Nasā’ī, Sunan al-Nasā’ī: kitāb al-īmān, bāb ‘alāmat al-īmān.
ii  We shall see that in both the classical Islamic and modern periods, this role has been debated; see Chapter 10.
iii  Some Muslim scholars even hold that the Prophet intentionally made these ‘mistakes’ to teach his followers; Qādī ‘Iyād,
Kitāb al-shifā, p. 342.

 2
THE TRANSMISSION AND COLLECTION OF PROPHETIC TRADITIONS
INTRODUCTION
Despite its seemingly arcane nature, the hadith tradition emerged in the early days of Islam as a
practical solution to the needs of the Muslim community. In the wake of the Prophet’s death, his
teachings served as an obvious source of guidance for the nascent Islamic community as it
struggled to determine how to live according to God’s will now that he was gone. The study of
hadiths began as a practical attempt to gather, organize, and sift through the authoritative
statements and behavior attributed to the Prophet. In the subsequent centuries, the hadith
tradition developed to meet new needs as they evolved. By the close of the tenth century, the
transmission and collection of hadiths had acquired a new dimension – quite apart from the
contents of any hadith, the report and its isnād became a medium of connection to the Prophet
that created authority and precedence within the Muslim community. The development of hadith
literature is thus best understood in light of the two general functions that hadiths fulfilled, that
of an authoritative maxim used to elaborate Islamic law and dogma, and that of a form of
connection to the Prophet’s charismatic legacy.
This chapter traces the origins and development of Sunni hadith transmission and collection
from the beginning of Islam until the modern period. Any mention of the notion of ‘authenticity’
or ‘authentic (sahīh)’ hadiths in this chapter refers to the Sunni Muslim criteria for reliability
and its system of hadith criticism, the mechanics of which will be discussed fully in the next
chapter. ‘Authentic’ or ‘forged’ here thus has no necessary correlation to whether or not the
Prophet Muhammad really said that statement or not. Debates over ‘what really happened’ in
the history of hadith will occupy us in
Chapter 9.
INHERITING THE PROPHET’S AUTHORITY
In Islam, religious authority emanates from God through His Prophet. Whether by referring to
the Prophet’s teachings directly or through the methods of religious problem-solving inherited
from him, only through a connection to God and His Prophet does a Muslim acquire the right to
speak authoritatively about Islamic law and belief. In the formative period of Islam, Muslims
thus turned back again and again to the authoritative legacy of the Prophet’s teachings as it
radiated outwards through the transmission and interpretation of pious members of the
community. It was the form through which this authoritative legacy was transmitted – whether
via Prophetic reports or methods of legal reasoning – that created different schools of thought
in the early Islamic period and led to the emergence of the hadith tradition.
In the Prophet’s adopted home, the city of Medina, al-Qāsim b. Muhammad b. Abī Bakr (d.
108/726–7), the grandson of the first caliph of Islam, and Sa‘īd b. al-Musayyab (d. 94/713),
the son-in-law of the most prolific student of the Prophet’s hadiths, Abū Hurayra, became two

 of the leading interpreters of the new faith after the death of the formative first generation of
Muslims. Their interpretations of the Quran and the Prophet’s legacy, as well as those of
founding fathers such as the second caliph ‘Umar b. al-Khattāb, were collected and synthesized
by the famous Medinan jurist Mālik b. Anas (d. 179/796). In Kufa, the Prophet’s friend and
pillar of the early Muslim community, ‘Abdallāh b. Mas‘ūd (d. 32/652–3), instructed his newly
established community on the tenets and practice of Islam as it adapted to the surroundings of
Christian, Jewish, and Zoroastrian Iraq. His disciple ‘Alqama b. Qays (d. 62/681) transmitted
these teachings to a promising junior, Ibrāhīm al-Nakha‘ī (d. 95/714), who in turn passed on
his approaches and methods of legal reasoning to Hammād b. Abī Sulaymān (d. 120/738). His
student of eighteen years, Abū Hanīfa (d. 150/767), would become a cornerstone of legal study
in Iraq and the eponym of the Hanafī school of law. Unlike Medina, the cradle of the Muslim
community where Muhammad’s legacy thrived as living communal practice, the diverse
environment of Kufa teemed with ancient doctrines and practices foreign to the early Muslim
community. Many such ideas found legitimation in the form of spurious hadiths falsely
attributed to the Prophet. Abū Hanīfa thus preferred relying cautiously on the Quran, well-
established hadiths and the methods of legal reasoning learned from his teachers rather than
risk acting on these fraudulent hadiths.
By the mid eighth century, two general trends in interpreting and applying Islam had emerged
in its newly conquered lands. For both these trends, the Quran and the Prophet’s
implementation of that message were the only constitutive sources of authority for Muslims.
The practice and rulings of the early community, which participated in establishing the faith
and inherited the Prophet’s authority, were the lenses through which scholars like Abū Hanīfa
and Mālik understood these two sources. Another early scholar, ‘Abd al-Rahmān al-Awzā‘ī of
Beirut (d. 157/773–4), thus stated that ‘religious knowledge (‘ilm) is what has come to us from
the Companions of the Prophet; what has not is not knowledge.’1 In Sunni Islam, a Companion
is anyone who saw the Prophet while a Muslim and died as a Muslim. When presented with a
situation for which the Quran and the well-known teachings of the Prophet and his Companions
provided no clear answer, scholars like Abū Hanīfa relied on their own interpretations of these
sources to respond. Such scholars were known as the ahl al-ra’y, or the Partisans of Legal
Reasoning.
Other pious members of the community preferred to limit themselves to the opinions of the
earliest generations of Muslims and more dubious reports from the Prophet rather than
speculate in a realm they felt was the exclusive purview of God and His Prophet. The great
scholar of Baghdad, Ahmad b. Hanbal (d. 241/855), epitomized this transmission-based
approach to understanding law and faith in his famous statement: ‘You hardly see anyone
applying reason (ra’y) [to some issue of religion or law] except that there lies, in his heart,
some deep-seated resentment. An unreliable narration [from the Prophet] is thus dearer to me
than the use of reason.’2 Such transmission-based scholars, referred to as ‘the Partisans of
Hadith (ahl al-hadīth),’ preferred the interpretations of members of the early Islamic
community to their own. For them the Muslim confrontation with the cosmopolitan atmosphere
of the Near East threatened the unadulterated purity of Islam. A narcissistic indulgence of

 human reason would encourage heresy and the temptation to stray from God’s revealed path.
Only by clinging stubbornly to the ways of the Prophet and his righteous successors could they
preserve the authenticity of their religion.
For the ahl al-hadīth, reports traced back to the Prophet, bearing his name and conveying his
authority, were prima facie compelling. Even if a scholar were not sure that a hadith was
reliable, the powerful phrase ‘the Messenger of God said…’ possessed great authority. Many
unreliable hadiths were used in efforts to understand the meaning of Quranic words, to
reconstruct the campaigns of the Prophet, to document the virtues of the Companions or simply
in preaching that exhorted Muslims towards piety. Even in legal issues, where as we shall see
scholars like Ibn Hanbal were more rigorous about authenticating hadiths, ahl al-hadīth
scholars sometimes depended on unreliable hadiths. It was amid this vying between the ahl al-
hadīth and ahl al-ra’y schools that the Sunni hadith tradition emerged.
EARLY HADITH COLLECTION AND WRITING
From the beginning of Islam, Muhammad’s words and deeds were of the utmost interest to his
followers. He was the unquestioned exemplar of faith and piety in Islam and the bridge
between God and the temporal world. Although, as we shall see, there was controversy over
setting down the Prophet’s daily teachings in writing, it is not surprising that those Companions
who knew how to write tried to record the memorable statements or actions of their Prophet.
As paper was unknown in the Middle East at the time (it was introduced from China in the late
700s), the small notebooks they compiled, called sahīfas, would have consisted of papyrus,
parchment (scraped, limed and stretched animal skins), both very expensive, or cruder
substances such as palm fronds. Although there is some evidence that the Prophet ordered the
collection of his rulings on taxation, these sahīfas were not public documents; they were the
private notes of individual Companions.3 Some of the Companions recorded as having sahīfas
were Jābir b. ‘Abdallāh, ‘Alī b. Abī Tālib, Abū Hurayra and ‘Abdallāh b. ‘Amr b. al-‘Ās.
 
Figure 2.0 Leading Hadith Transmitters from the Companions
 
Certain Companions were more active in amassing, memorizing, and writing down hadiths
than others. Like grandchildren eager to collect stories and recollections about a grandparent
they barely knew, we find that it is often the most junior Companions of the Prophet who
became the most prolific collectors and transmitters of hadiths. Abū Hurayra (d. 58/678), who

 knew the Prophet for only three years, is the largest single source for hadiths, with
approximately 5,300 narrations in later hadith collections.4 Although he did not write hadiths
down in his early career, by his death Abū Hurayra had boxes full of the sahīfas he had
compiled.5 ‘Abdallāh b. ‘Umar, the son of ‘Umar b. al-Khattāb, was twenty-three years old
when the Prophet died and is the second largest source for hadiths, with approximately 2,600
narrations recorded in later collections. Ibn ‘Abbās (d. 68/686–8), who was only fourteen
years old (or nine according to some sources) when the Prophet died, is the fifth largest
source, with around 1,700 hadiths.6
Since Companions like Ibn ‘Abbās and Abū Hurayra only knew the Prophet for a short time,
they apparently amassed their vast numbers of hadiths by seeking them out from more senior
Companions. Abū Hurayra is thus rarely recorded as saying ‘I heard the Prophet of God say…’
– more often he simply states indirectly that ‘the Prophet said …’ Just as today we regularly
quote people whom we did not hear directly, this would have been normal for the Companions.
The obsession with specifying direct oral transmission with no intermediary, which
characterized later hadith scholarship (see Chapter 3), did not exist during the first generations
of Islam. Ibn ‘Abbās probably heard only forty hadiths directly from the Prophet. The rest he
frequently narrates by saying ‘the Prophet of God said…’ or through a chain of transmission of
one, two, or even three older Companions.7
Not surprisingly, those who spent a great deal of intimate time with the Prophet were also
major sources of hadiths. Anas b. Mālik, who entered the Prophet’s house as a servant at the
age of ten, and the Prophet’s favorite wife, Aisha, count as the third and fourth most prolific
hadith sources, with approximately 2,300 and 2,200 narrations in later books respectively.8
Interestingly, those Companions who spent the most time with the Prophet during his public life
rank among the least prolific hadith transmitters. The Prophet’s close friend and successor,
Abū Bakr, his cousin/son-in-law ‘Alī b. Abī Tālib, and close advisor ‘Umar are the sources
for only 142, 536 and 537 hadiths respectively. These prominent early Muslims, who were
looked to as leaders responsible for decisions and religious rulings after the Prophet’s death,
seem to have preserved the spirit of Muhammad’s teachings in their actions and methods of
reasoning rather than by citing his hadiths directly.
When reading books of hadiths, at first it appears arbitrary which Companion narrates a
hadith from the Prophet. Certain Companions, however, demonstrated particular interests and
expertise in certain subjects. The Prophet’s wives, especially Aisha, not surprisingly serve as
the sources for hadiths about the Prophet’s personal hygiene, domestic habits, and sexual life.
Most of the hadiths in which the Prophet instructs his followers about the protocol for using
dogs – animals whose saliva is considered ritually impure by most Muslims – for hunting come
from the Companion ‘Adī b. Hātim, who clearly was very curious about this topic.
So dominant is the presence of Muhammad in the formative period of Islam that we forget
that after his death it was his Companions who assumed both complete religious and political
leadership in the community. It was Companions like Ibn ‘Abbās in Mecca, Ibn Mas‘ūd in Kufa
and Salmān al-Fārisī in Isfahan who had the responsibility of teaching new generations of
Muslims and new converts about the religion of a prophet they had never known. The

 generation who learned Islam from the Companions and in turn inherited from them the mantle
of the Prophet’s authority became known as the Successors (al-tābi‘ūn). Like the Companions,
they too recorded those recollections that their teachers recounted to them about the Prophet’s
words, deeds, and rulings. In addition to compiling their own sahīfas from the lessons of the
Companions, these Successors also passed on the Companions’ own sahīfas.
Some of the early isnāds that appear most regularly in hadith collections seem to be a record
of sahīfas being handed down from teacher to student or from father to son. We thus often find
the sahīfa-isnād of Abū Hurayra to ‘Abd al-Rahmān, to his son al-‘Alā’. The Successor Abū
al-Zubayr al-Makkī received the sahīfa of the Companion Jābir b. ‘Abdallāh, and one of the
most famous Successors, al-Hasan al-Basrī (d. 110/728), received the sahīfa of the Companion
Samura b. Jundub. The sahīfa of ‘Amr b. al-‘Ās, passed down to his grandson, to his son
Shu‘ayb, became an essential resource for the Prophet’s rulings on liability for injuries and
compensation for homicide. An example of a sahīfa that has survived intact today, the sahīfa of
the Successor Hammām b. Munabbih (d. circa 130/747), contains 138 hadiths from the Prophet
via Abū Hurayra.9
The vast preponderance of the hadiths that the Successors heard from the Companions,
however, were not in written form. Arabian society of the seventh and eighth centuries had a
highly developed tradition of oral poetry, and the Companions more often recounted their
memories of the Prophet in oral form only. Even to modern readers accustomed to writing
everything down, this is understandable to an extent; to them the Prophet was a contemporary
figure whose words and deeds lived on in their memories as freshly as we remember our own
teachers or parents. Only rarely do we put down these memories on paper.
Of course, the Prophet was no average person, and many of his Companions did seek to
record his legacy even during his own lifetime. There are several hadiths, however, in which
the Prophet warns his followers not to record his words out of fear that they might be confused
with God’s words as revealed in the Quran. As the Quran was still being set down in writing
during the Prophet’s lifetime by numerous scribes and in many private notebooks, collections
of the Prophet’s teachings might easily be conflated with the holy book. We thus find a famous
hadith in which the Companion Abū Sa‘īd al-Khudrī states, ‘We used not to write down
anything but the testimony of faith said in prayer (al-tashahhud) and the Quran.’ In another
hadith, the Companion Zayd b. Thābit states that the Prophet had forbidden his followers to
write down any of his words.10
It was unrealistic, however, that a lawmaker and political leader like the Prophet could
allow no written record keeping. It would simply have been impossible for Muslims to
preserve accurately the teachings they heard from the Prophet without some recourse to
writing. Alongside hadiths banning writing, we thus also find reports encouraging it. The
Companion Anas b. Mālik is even quoted as saying, ‘We did not consider the knowledge of
those who did not write it down to be [real] knowledge.’11 We thus also find hadiths in which
the Prophet allows new Muslims visiting from outside Medina to record lessons he gave in a
sermon.12
This contradictory evidence concerning the writing down of hadiths has proven very

 problematic for both Muslim and Western scholars. Some Muslim scholars, such as the
Damascene prodigy al-Nawawī (d. 676/1277), have reconciled the material by assuming that
the reports condemning the writing of hadiths came from the earlier years of the Prophet’s
career, when he was concerned about his words being mistaken for the Quran. Permission to
write down his teachings would have come later, when the Quran had become more
established in the minds of Muslims, and the Prophet’s role as the leader of a functioning state
required some written records.13
Western scholars, on the other hand, have often understood the tension between the writing of
hadiths and its prohibition to reflect competing values within the Islamic hadith tradition itself.
In Islam, religious knowledge is primarily oral in nature – a written book only serves as a
guide for the oral recitation of its contents. On a conceptual level, it is almost as if written
pages are dead matter that only comes alive when read aloud. It is interesting that the
importance of oral knowledge kept the debate over whether or not one should write down
hadiths alive into the 1000s CE, over two hundred years after it had been rendered moot by the
popularization of written hadith collections!
In the early Islamic period, however, this focus on orality was very practical. The Arabic
alphabet was still primitive, and many letters were written identically and could only be
distinguished from one another by context. Even today, the Arabic script does not indicate short
vowels. We can imagine an English sentence written with only consonants and a few vowels,
such as ‘I wnt t ht the bll.’ Is it ‘I want to hit the ball,’ ‘I want to hit the bell, ’ ‘I went to hit the
ball,’ et cetera? We could only know the correct reading of the sentence if we knew its context.
With the Arabic script, then, knowing the context and even the intended meaning of a written
text is essential for properly understanding it. The sahīfas of the Companions and Successors
thus only served as memory-aids, written skeletons of hadiths that would jog the author’s
memory when he or she read them.
These sahīfas could not thus simply be picked up and read. One had to hear the book read by
its transmitter in order to avoid grave misunderstandings of the Prophet’s words. If hadith
transmitters had reason to believe that a certain narrator had transmitted hadiths without
hearing them read by a teacher, in fact, they considered this a serious flaw in the authenticity of
that material. Abū al-Zubayr al-Makkī had heard only part of the Companion Jābir b.
‘Abdallāh’s sahīfa read aloud by Jābir, and this undermined his reliability in transmission for
some Muslim hadith critics. Some early hadith transmitters, like ‘Atā’ b. Muslim al-Khaffāf,
were so concerned about their books of hadiths being read and misunderstood after their deaths
that they burned or buried them.14
Of course, this practical and cultural emphasis on direct oral transmission did not mean that
Muslims ignored the reliability of written records. Even when transmitting a hadith orally, it
was best for a scholar to be reading it from his book. The famous hadith scholar Ibn Ma‘īn (d.
233/848) thus announced that he preferred a transmitter with an accurate book to one with an
accurate memory.15 By the early 700s CE, setting down hadiths in writing had become regular
practice. The seminal hadith transmitter and Successor Muhammad b. Shihāb al-Zuhrī (d.
124/742) considered writing down hadiths to be absolutely necessary for accurate

 transmission.
Collectors like al-Zuhrī were encouraged to collect and record hadiths by the Umayyad
dynasty, which assumed control of the Islamic empire in 661 CE. The Umayyad governor ‘Abd
al-‘Azīz b. Marwān requested that the Successor Kathīr b. Murra send him records of all the
hadiths he had heard from the Companions.16 ‘Abd al-‘Azīz’s son, the Umayyad caliph ‘Umar
b. ‘Abd al-‘Azīz, ordered the governor of Medina to record all the hadiths concerning
administrative and taxation matters.17
Another important question that arose during the early transmission and collection of hadiths
was whether or not one had to repeat a hadith word for word or if one could just communicate
its general meaning. Most early Muslim scholars understood that keeping track of the exact
wording of hadiths was not feasible and that ‘narration by the general meaning (al-riwāya bi’l-
ma‘nā)’ was an inescapable reality. The Companion Wāthila b. Asqa‘ had admitted that
sometimes the early Muslims even confused the exact wording of the Quran, which was
universally well-known and well-preserved. So how, he asked, could one expect any less in
the case of a report that the Prophet had said just once? Al-Hasan al-Basrī is reported to have
said, ‘If we only narrated to you what we could repeat word for word, we would only narrate
two hadiths. But if what we narrate generally communicates what the hadith prohibits or
allows then there is no problem.’ Some early Muslim scholars insisted on repeating hadiths
exactly as they had heard them. Ibn Sīrīn (d. 110/728) even repeated grammatical errors in
hadiths that he had heard.18 Eventually, Muslim scholars arrived at the compromise that one
could paraphrase a hadith provided that one was learned enough to understand its meaning
properly.19
 

 Figure 2.1 Transmission and Criticism of Hadiths from the Companions of the Prophet and Successors
 
TRANSCRIPTS OF LEGAL DEBATES: THE EMERGENCE OF MUSANNAF COLLECTIONS
If we imagine the world of Islam in the early and mid eighth century CE, the next stage of
hadith literature appears as a direct reflection of Muslim scholarly discourse of the time. We
can picture the prominent Successor al-Hasan al-Basrī, who had studied with Companions like
Anas b. Mālik and who had been brought up in the house of one of the Prophet’s wives, as a
pillar of piety in Basra and recourse for the questions of the city’s inhabitants. Seated under a
reed awning, al-Hasan would answer questions concerning how to pray, how to divide
inheritance and how to understand God’s attributes by drawing on all the religious knowledge
he had gained. He might reply by quoting the Quran or something that his mother had heard
from the Prophet. On other occasions he might tell his audience how ‘Alī b. Abī Tālib, whom
he had met as a young man, had ruled on a particular case. Sometimes al-Hasan might use his
own understanding of the principles put forth in the Quran or the Prophet’s teachings to provide
a new answer to a question. A few decades later in Medina, we can picture Mālik b. Anas
seated against one of the pillars of the Prophet’s mosque and answering questions in a similar
way.
The first organized works of Islamic scholarship, called musannafs, or ‘books organized
topically,’ were basically transcripts of this discourse as it had developed during the first two
centuries of Islam. Arranged into chapters dealing with different legal or ritual questions, they
were topical records of pious Muslims’ efforts to respond to questions about faith and
practice. The earliest surviving musannaf, Mālik’s Muwatta’, is thus a mixture of Prophetic
hadiths, the rulings of his Companions, the practice of the scholars of Medina, and the opinions
of Mālik himself. The version of the Muwatta’ that became famous in North Africa and
Andalusia contains 1,720 reports. Of these, however, only 527 are Prophetic hadiths; 613 are
statements of the Companions, 285 are from Successors, and the rest are Mālik’s own
opinions.20 Likewise, the earliest known musannaf, that of Ibn Jurayj (d. 150/767), was a
collection of reports from the Prophet, Companions, and Successors such as ‘Atā’ b. Abī
Rabāh (d. 114/732). Another famous scholar from this period who compiled a musannaf was
the revered scholar of Kufa, Sufyān al-Thawrī (d. 161/778).
A very large musannaf surviving from this earlier period was written by a student of Mālik
and Ibn Jurayj, ‘Abd al-Razzāq al-San‘ānī (d. 211/827), but is much larger than the one-volume
Muwatta’. The Musannaf of ‘Abd al-Razzāq, an inhabitant of Yemen, is eleven printed
volumes. As Figure 2.2 demonstrates, ‘Abd al-Razzāq drew mostly from his teachers Ma‘mar
b. Rāshid and Ibn Jurayj.21 Another famous musannaf, written by a scholar from the generation
of ‘Abd al-Razzāq’s students, comes from the hadith scholar of Baghdad, Abū Bakr b. Abī
Shayba (d. 235/849). Figure 2.2 provides an example of the type of material and sources that a
musannaf would draw upon.
 

 Figure 2.2 Subchapter from ‘Abd al-Razzāq’s Musannaf Concerning Ablutions
 

 In many ways, the musannaf genre predates the emergence of classical hadith literature rather
than being part of it. If hadith collections are characterized by a predominant focus on reports
from the Prophet that include isnāds as a means for critics to verify their authenticity, then
books like the Muwatta’ and the Musannaf of ‘Abd al-Razzāq are not technically hadith
collections. Both Mālik and ‘Abd al-Razzāq cite rulings of Companions and Successors more
frequently than they cite Prophetic hadiths. But even when quoting the Prophet directly, the
obsession with complete, unbroken chains of transmission that would characterize the classical
period of hadith collection is absent. Even when Mālik does cite Prophetic hadiths, on sixty-
one occasions he completely omits the isnād and simply states, ‘The Prophet said…’ Rather,
we should think of musannafs as early works of Islamic law that represent the diversity of
sources from which legal and doctrinal answers could be sought during the first two centuries
of Islam. In a musannaf, a scholar like Mālik was trying to answer questions with the
resources he felt were reliable and was not concerned with proving their authenticity
according to a rigid system of isnād authentication.
Of course, musannafs would serve a very important function in law, hadith literature, and
hadith criticism. Later scholars would turn to musannafs to know the legal opinions of
Companions and Successors, and hadith critics would use them as evidence when investigating
whether a hadith was really something said by the Prophet or a statement actually made by a
Companion or Successor.
But if Muhammad was the ultimate interpreter of God’s will, why would a scholar like Mālik
so infrequently rely on his words in a musannaf collection? This question has cast a shadow of
doubt over the authenticity of the hadith corpus, a question addressed in Chapter 9. Here,
however, we can provide a few possible explanations. As Figure 2.1 demonstrates, during the
time of Mālik and Ibn Jurayj hadith transmission was localized. When Mālik was asked by a
student whether or not one should wash in between one’s toes when performing ritual
ablutions, he said that it was not required. Another student, ‘Abdallāh b. Wahb, objected,
saying that in his native Egypt they had a hadith through the Companion Mustawrid b. Shaddād
telling how the Prophet did wash between his toes. Hearing the isnād, Mālik said, ‘That hadith
is good, and I had not heard it until this moment.’ He acted on it from that point on.22 It is not
surprising that Mālik had not heard the hadith, since he only left his home in Medina to perform
pilgrimage to the nearby city Mecca. Many of the hadiths that were widespread in Syria, Egypt,
or among the students of Abū Hanīfa in Iraq were unknown to him. It is thus very likely that
Mālik did not cite a Prophetic hadith on an issue because he knew of none. As Figure 2.1
indicates, it was only among the generation of Mālik’s students, and even more so among their
students, that hadith scholars traveled widely in order to unify the corpus of hadiths.
In addition, musannafs drew on such a wide variety of authoritative figures because they
were all legitimate inheritors of the Prophet’s authority. The Companions, who had lived with
the Prophet for years and understood the principles upon which he acted, and the Successors,
who learned from them, were seen as the carriers of the Prophet’s message and were heeded
accordingly. Even a scholar like Mālik, living in the generation after the Successors, was so
esteemed as a pious interpreter of the Prophet’s message that he could give his opinion without

 citing any sources at all.
THE MUSNAD ERA AND THE EMERGENCE OF HADITH LITERATURE PROPER
The shift from the variety of the musannaf to the focus on Prophetic hadiths that characterizes
hadith literature occurred with the emergence of the musnad collections in the late eighth and
early ninth centuries CE. While sahīfas had been mere ad hoc collections, and musannafs were
arranged as topical references, musnad collections were organized according to isnād. All the
hadiths narrated from a certain Companion would fall into one chapter, then all those
transmitted from another into the next, et cetera. The appearance of musnad collections
occurred due to impetuses from both the broader study of Islamic law and within the more
narrow community of Muslim hadith critics.
During the late eighth and early ninth centuries, the regional schools of Islamic law, each
based on the teachings and interpretation of learned figures like Mālik and Abū Hanīfa, faced a
new challenge. A young scholar named Muhammad b. Idrīs al-Shāfi‘ī (d. 204/820), who had
studied with Mālik in Medina and the students of Abū Hanīfa in Iraq, and had traveled widely
in Egypt and Yemen, asserted that it should be the direct hadiths of the Prophet, and not his
precedent as understood by local scholars, that supplemented the Quran as the second major
source of law. In the face of a contrasting hadith that they had not previously known, al-Shāfi‘ī
argued, the followers of Mālik and Abū Hanīfa should take the Prophet’s words over the
stances of their local schools. Through his students and especially the study of his major legal
work, the Umm (The Motherbook), al-Shāfi‘ī had an immediate and powerful influence on ahl
al-hadīth jurists. From this point on in the hadith tradition, the testimony of Muhammad would
trump all other figures of authority and become the predominant focus of hadith collections.
Musnads reflected this interest, as they focused almost entirely on Prophetic hadiths and
included Companion or Successor opinions only as occasional commentaries.
 
Figure 2.3 Musnad Organization
 
Quite apart from broader questions of legal theory, the burgeoning class of Muslim hadith
critics that emerged in the mid and late eighth century had good reason to start organizing their
personal hadith collections along isnād lines. First, the growing number of reports erroneously

 attributed to the Prophet had made the isnād an indispensable tool. Limiting hadith collections
to material that had an isnād was a solid first line of defense against hadith forgery – if you
claimed that the Prophet had said something but could provide no isnād, your hadith had no
place in a musnad. Second, as we will see in the next chapter, the single most important factor
in judging the reliability of a hadith transmitter was determining if he or she was corroborated
in the material he or she reported. In order to know if a hadith transmitter is corroborated in his
transmissions, critics compared the hadiths he reported to those of others who studied with his
teachers. Thus we find that many musnads, such as that of al-Rūyānī (d. 307/919–20), are
organized into chapters as shown in Figure 2.3 above.
In order to determine whether or not Transmitter A is generally corroborated in the material
he or she transmits, we need only flip through the chapters of the musnad comparing the hadiths
that Transmitter A related from each Successor with those of Transmitters B and C.
The earliest known musnad, which has also survived intact, is that of Abū Dāwūd al-Tayālisī
(d. 204/818). The most famous musnad is that of Ibn Hanbal, which consists of about 27,700
hadiths (anywhere from one fourth to one third of which are repetitions of hadiths via different
narrations) and was actually assembled into final form by the scholar’s son. Ibn Hanbal
claimed he had sifted the contents of his Musnad from over 750,000 hadiths and intended it to
be a reference for students of Islamic law. Although he acknowledged that the book contained
unreliable hadiths, he supposedly claimed that all its hadiths were admissible in discussions
about the Prophet’s Sunna – if it was not in his Musnad, he claimed, it could not be a proof in
law.23
Other well-known and widely read musnads from the ninth century include those of al-
Humaydī (d. 219/834), of al-Hārith b. Abī Usāma (d. 282/896), of al-Musaddad (d. 228/843),
of Abū Bakr al-Bazzār (d. 292/904–5), and of the Hanafī scholar Abū Ya‘lā al-Mawsilī (d.
307/919). The largest musnad ever produced, which has tragically not survived, was that of
Baqī b. Makhlad (d. 276/889).
Instead of compiling large musnads that included the hadiths of numerous Companions, some
scholars devoted books to only one Companion: Abū Bakr al-Marwazī (d. 292/904–5), for
example, compiled a small musnad with all the hadiths he had come across transmitted from
the Companion Abū Bakr.
Although some musnads, like that of al-Bazzār, contained some discussion of the flaws
(‘ilal) found in the isnāds of a hadith, in general musnads were not limited to hadiths their
compilers believed were authentic. Instead, they functioned as storehouses for all the reports
that a certain hadith scholar had heard. As Figure 2.1 shows, by the time of Ibn Hanbal, hadith
collectors were no longer constrained by regional boundaries. Hadith collectors like
Muhammad b. Yahyā al-Dhuhlī or Qutayba b. Sa‘īd were originally from Nishapur in Iran and
Balkh in Afghanistan, but they traveled throughout the Muslim world on what was known as
‘the voyage in the quest for know-ledge (al-rihla fī talab al-‘ilm)’ to collect hadiths from
transmitters like ‘Abd al-Razzāq in Yemen or Layth b. Sa‘d in Egypt. Throughout their travels
they recorded the hadiths they heard in their musnads regardless of their authenticity or their
legal and doctrinal implications. The staunch Sunni Ibn Hanbal’s Musnad thus contains a hadith

 – shocking to the sensibility of Sunni Muslims – that describes how an early copy of the Quran
had been stored under Aisha’s bed only to be found and partially eaten by a small animal
leaving the record of God’s revelation permanently truncated!24
THE SAHĪH AND SUNAN MOVEMENT
Musannafs and musnads both had their advantages: musannafs were conveniently arranged by
subject, and musnads focused on Prophetic hadiths with full isnāds. From the early ninth to the
early tenth century, a large number of respected ahl al-hadīth jurists combined the two genres
in the form of sunan / sahīh books. A sunan was organized topically, and thus easily used as a
legal reference, but also focused on Prophetic reports with full isnāds. More importantly, the
ahl al-hadīth jurists who compiled these sunans devoted great efforts to assuring or discussing
the authenticity of the books’ contents. In general, the authors of sunan books sought only to
include hadiths that had been relied upon by Muslim scholars and were known to be authentic
either because they had strong isnāds or because the community of scholars had agreed that
they truly reflected the Prophet’s teachings. This new focus on producing collections of hadiths
with an emphasis on authenticity led many of the collections produced in the sunan movement
to be dubbed sahīh (authentic) books by either their authors or later Muslim readers. Two of
the earliest known sunans are those of Sa‘īd b. Mansūr al-Khurāsānī (d. 227/842) and
‘Abdallāh al-Dārimī (d. 255/869).
Two participants in the sunan movement in particular, Muhammad b. Ismā‘īl al-Bukhārī (d.
256/870) and his student Muslim b. al-Hajjāj al-Naysābūrī (d. 261/875), broke with the ahl al-
hadīth’s traditional willingness to use weak hadiths in law. Unlike their teacher Ibn Hanbal,
al-Bukhārī and Muslim felt that there were enough authentic hadiths in circulation that the ahl
al-hadīth jurists could dispense with less worthy narrations. Al-Bukhārī and Muslim were thus
the first to produce hadith collections devoted only to hadiths whose isnāds they felt met the
requirements of authenticity. Their books were the first wave of what some have termed ‘the
sahīh movement.’25 Known as the Sahīhayn (literally ‘the two Sahīhs’), the collections of al-
Bukhārī and Muslim would become the most famous books of hadith in Sunni Islam. It is
therefore worth examining their contents and structure.
It is reported that al-Bukhārī devoted sixteen years to sifting the hadiths he included in his
Sahīh from a pool of six hundred thousand narrations.26 The finished work was not a mere
hadith collection – it was a massive expression of al-Bukhārī’s vision of Islamic law and
dogma backed up with hadiths the author felt met the most rigorous standards of authenticity.
The book covers the full range of legal and ritual topics, but also includes treatments of many
other issues such as the implication of technical terms in hadith transmission. The book
consists of ninety-eight chapters, each divided into subchapters (according to the standard
printings; see endnote 27). The subchapter titles indicate the legal implication or ruling the
reader should derive from the subsequent hadiths, and often include a short comment from the
author or a report from a Companion or Successor elucidating the hadith. Al-Bukhārī often
repeats a Prophetic tradition, but through different narrations and in separate chapters.
Opinions have varied about the exact number of hadiths in the Sahīh, depending on whether

 one defines a ‘hadith’ as a Prophetic tradition or a narration of that tradition. Generally,
experts have placed the number of full-isnād narrations at 7,397. Of these many are repetitions
or different versions of the same report, with the number of Prophetic traditions at
approximately 2,602.27
Muslim’s Sahīh is much more a raw hadith collection than al-Bukhārī’s work. It contains far
fewer chapters (only fifty-four in the accepted Amīriyya edition) and lacks al-Bukhārī’s legal
commentary, but it contains a similar number of narrations (7,748). Unlike al-Bukhārī, Muslim
keeps all the narrations of a certain hadith in the same section. Muslim also diverges
significantly from al-Bukhārī in his near exclusion of commentary reports from Companions
and later figures.
There is considerable overlap between the Sahīhayn. Muslim scholars generally put the
number of traditions found in both books at 2,326. Al-Bukhārī and Muslim drew on essentially
the same pool of transmitters, sharing approximately 2,400 narrators. Al-Bukhārī narrated from
only about 430 that Muslim did not, while Muslim used about 620 transmitters al-Bukhārī
excluded.
Al-Bukhārī’s and Muslim’s works had a great deal of influence on their students and
contemporaries. Ibn Khuzayma (d. 311/923), a central figure in the Shāfi‘ī school who studied
with al-Bukhārī and Muslim, compiled a sahīh work that came to be known as Sahīh Ibn
Khuzayma. Abū Hafs ‘Umar al-Bujayrī of Samarqand (d. 311/924) produced a collection
called al-Jāmi‘ al-sahīh, and even the famous historian and exegete Muhammad b. Jarīr al-
Tabarī (d. 310/923) attempted a gigantic sahīh work but died before he finished it. Sa‘īd b. al-
Sakan (d. 353/964) of Egypt also collected a small sahīh book consisting of hadiths necessary
for legal rulings and whose authenticity he claimed was agreed on by all. Ibn Khuzayma’s
student Ibn al-Jārūd (d. 307/919–20) compiled a similar work called al-Muntaqā (The
Select). Ibn Hibbān al-Bustī’s (d. 354/965) massive Sahīh is usually considered the last
installment in the sahīh movement.
Other participants in the sahīh movement also focused on hadiths with strong and reliable
isnāds, but they nonetheless featured some reports that they acknowledged as being unreliable
but included either because they were widely used among jurists or because the authors, like
Ibn Hanbal, could find no reliable hadith addressing that topic. Four of these books in
particular attained great renown. The Sunan of Abū Dāwūd al-Sijistānī (d. 275/889), a close
student of Ibn Hanbal, contains about 5,276 hadiths and focuses on reports used in deriving
law. The author alerts the reader to any narrations which have serious flaws in their isnāds.
The Jāmi‘ of Muhammad b. ‘Īsā al-Tirmidhī (d. 279/892), one of al-Bukhārī’s disciples,
contains about 4,330 narrations and also focuses on hadiths that different schools of law had
used as legal proofs. It also includes detailed discussions of their authenticity. Although al-
Tirmidhī’s sunan does include numerous unreliable hadiths, the author notes their status. As
such, later scholars often called the work Sahīh al-Tirmidhī. Ahmad b. Shu‘ayb al-Nasā’ī (d.
303/916), another student of al-Bukhārī, compiled two sunans: the larger one contained many
hadiths that the author acknowledged as unreliable. The smaller one, known as the Mujtabā
(The Chosen), contains 5,770 narrations and focused on reliable hadiths. It has thus been

 known as Sahīh al-Nasā’ī. Finally, Muhammad b. Yazīd b. Mājah’s (d. 273/887) Sunan is an
interesting case. Although the author seems to have tried to include only reliable hadiths, some
later Muslim scholars noted that as much as one fourth of the book’s 4,485 narrations are
actually unreliable.28
With the sahīh/sunan movement, the hadith tradition had reached a watershed. The works of
scholars like al-Bukhārī, Muslim and al-Tirmidhī were possessed of a definitiveness that
seemed both to reject many aspects of the culture of hadith transmission and to offer
themselves as the ultimate hadith references for legal scholars. Muslim wrote his Sahīh as a
response to what he saw as the laxity and misplaced priorities of hadith scholars and
transmitters. He believed that those scholars who strove to collect as many hadiths as possible
regardless of their quality were doing so only to impress others.29 Muslim expressed serious
concern over would-be hadith scholars who transmitted material of dubious nature to the
exclusion of well-known and well-authenticated hadiths. They provided this material to the
common people when in fact it is hadith scholars’ duty to leave the common folk with
trustworthy reports only. Muslim composed his Sahīh to fulfill this function. Abū Dāwūd
expressed a similar purpose for his Sunan. He states confidently that he knows of ‘nothing after
the Quran more essential for people to learn than this book [his Sunan], and a person would
suffer no loss if he did not take in any more knowledge after it.’30
TOPICAL HADITH WORKS
During the ninth and tenth centuries, Sunni hadith scholars were not merely writing
comprehensive sunan works. They also compiled collections of hadiths dealing with
individual topics. In fact, these specific treatises were often bound together to form a sunan or
added on to the standard legal chapters of a sunan to add a new component to the work.
The earliest genre of topical works was that of zuhd, or asceticism and pious excellence.
These books included hadiths describing the Prophet’s supreme piety and abstention from any
religiously ambiguous behavior, as well as the superlative practice of early Muslim saints and
even pre-Islamic prophets. The earliest known book of zuhd is that of Ibn al-Mubārak (d.
181/797). The great hadith transmitters and collectors Wakī‘ b. al-Jarrāh (d. 197/812) and Ibn
Hanbal also compiled books of zuhd. Even as late as the eleventh century the Shāfi‘ī scholar
Abū Bakr al-Bayhaqī (d. 458/1066) wrote a hadith collection devoted to the zuhd theme.
Other scholars wrote books similarly addressing the question of perfecting Muslim manners.
Al-Bukhārī wrote his ‘Book Devoted to Manners (al-Adab al-mufrad)’, and a scholar named
Ibn Abī al-Dunyā (d. 281/894) of Baghdad wrote dozens of such hadith works on topics such
as the importance of giving thanks, understanding dreams, and coping with sadness and grief.
The hadith scholar Humayd b. Zanjawayh (d. 251/855–6) composed a book of hadiths that
warned Muslims about the punishments that awaited them in Hellfire for certain deeds as well
as the heavenly rewards they could expect in Paradise for goodly acts. Known as the Kitāb al-
targhīb wa al-tarhīb (The Book of Enjoining and Warning), Ibn Zanjawayh’s book was very
popular and was transmitted widely. In the 1200s CE, ‘Abd al-‘Azīm al-Mundhirī (d.
656/1258) wrote another famous book in this genre with the same title. Al-Nasā’ī and his

 student Ibn al-Sunnī (d. 364/975) both wrote hadith books entitled ‘Deeds of the Day and Night
(‘Amal al-yawm wa al-layla)’ on the pious invocations that the Prophet would say in various
daily situations. The famous young scholar of Damascus, al-Nawawī (d. 676/1277), also wrote
two very popular hadith books on manners and perfecting Muslim practice. His small Adhkār
(Prayers) contains hadiths on the prayers one says before activities such as eating, drinking,
and traveling with no isnāds but with the author’s comments on their reliability. Al-Nawawī’s
Riyād al-sālihīn min kalām sayyid al-mursalīn (The Gardens of the Righteous from the
Speech of the Master of Prophets) is a larger book of ethical, piety, and etiquette-related
hadiths which has become extremely popular, serving as a main hadith text for the Tablīgh-i
Jamā‘at, one of the largest missionary institutions in the modern Muslim world.
Similarly designed to frighten readers about the impending apocalypse and coming of ‘the
Days of God’ was an early topical hadith book written by al-Bukhārī’s teacher Nu‘aym b.
Hammād (d. 228/842) entitled Kitāb al-fitan (The Book of Tribulations). Sunan and sahīh
books regularly contained chapters on these apocalyptical ‘tribulations’ as well.
The most popular subject for topical hadith collections among Sunni scholars in the ninth and
tenth centuries was the importance of adhering to the Sunna of the Prophet and the ways of the
early Muslim community on issues of belief and practice. These books of ‘sunna’ contained
Prophetic hadiths and reports from respected early Muslims that exhorted readers to derive
their understanding of religion solely from the revealed texts of the Quran and Sunna while
avoiding the heretical pitfalls of speculative reasoning about God, His attributes and the nature
of the afterlife. Sunna books emphasized all the components of the Sunni Muslim identity as it
was emerging in the eighth and ninth centuries: a reliance on transmitted knowledge instead of
speculative reasoning, a rejection of the ahl al-ra’y legal school, an affirmation that all the
Companions of the Prophet were upright (but that the best were Abū Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthmān then
‘Alī), and political quietism. The most famous books of sunna are those of Ibn Hanbal’s son
‘Abdallāh (d. 290/903), Ibn Abī ‘Āsim (d. 287/900), Muhammad b. Nasr al-Marwazī (d.
294/906), and al-Barbahārī (d. 329/941).
Some later sunna hadith collections went into more detail on issues of proper Sunni belief.
The staunch Hanbali Sufi Khwāje ‘Abdallāh al-Ansārī of Herat (d. 481/1089) wrote a multi-
volume hadith work condemning speculative theology and theologians (Dhamm al-kalām wa
ahlihi). Ibn al-Waddāh (d. 286/899) wrote a small book on heretical innovation (Kitāb al-
bida‘), while al-Dāraqutnī (d. 385/995) wrote one treatise collecting all the hadiths affirming
that Muslims would actually see God on the Day of Judgment (Kitāb al-ru’ya) and another one
bringing together all the hadiths telling that God descends during the night to answer the
prayers of the believers.
The collective affirmation that all the Companions of the Prophet were righteous and reliable
transmitters of the Prophet’s teachings, as opposed to the Shiite denigration of all the
Companions who did not support ‘Alī’s claim to leadership, prompted another important
topical genre in the ninth century. Books on the ‘Virtues of the Companions (fadā’il al-
sahāba)’ became an important statement of Sunni belief. Ibn Hanbal thus collected all the
hadiths he could find in which the Prophet described the excellence or special characteristics

 of each Companion in his Fadā’il al-sahāba. Al-Nasā’ī also wrote a shorter Fadā’il al-
sahāba work as well as a hadith collection specifically devoted to ‘Alī’s virtues (Khasā’is
‘Alī).
Although only a few books were written in the genre, books of shamā’il, or the virtues and
characteristics of the Prophet, were extremely popular in Islamic civilization. Such books
discussed all aspects of the Prophet’s personality, appearance, conduct, and miracles, and
were often the only books through which the less educated segments of Muslim society from
Mali to India would have had contact with high religious tradition. Al-Tirmidhī’s Shamā’il
was extremely widely read, as was al-Qādī ‘Iyād’s (d. 544/1149) Kitāb al-shifā. The Egyptian
Jalāl al-Dīn al-Suyūtī (d. 911/1505) also wrote a later shamā’il work entitled al-Khasā’is al-
kubrā. As al-Qādī ‘Iyād explained, these books were not designed to convince non-Muslims of
Muhammad’s prophethood, but rather to reinforce Muslims’ faith in the unique and
unparalleled virtues of ‘the last of God’s messengers.’31
Another genre of topical collections focused on stories about Muhammad that proved or
illustrated his standing as a prophet. The most famous works of Dalā’il al-nubuwwa (proofs of
prophethood) come from the eleventh-century scholars al-Hākim al-Naysābūrī (d. 405/1014)
and his students Abū Nu‘aym al-Isbahānī (d. 430/1038) and Abū Bakr al-Bayhaqī.
Like musnads, these various monographs were unconcerned with assuring the authenticity of
the hadiths they contained. In fact, books on the virtues of Companions and sunna often
contained reports that later Sunni scholars and sometimes the authors themselves found
baseless or reprehensible. The Kitāb al-sunna of Ibn Abī ‘Āsim, that of Ibn Hanbal’s son
‘Abdallāh and the Kitāb al-tawhīd (Book of God’s Unity) of Ibn Khuzayma all included a
hadith describing how when God sits on His throne it squeaks like a saddle mounted by its
rider. But even Ibn Hanbal’s son notes the hadith’s isnād is weak, and later Sunni scholars
were so shocked by this blatant anthropomorphism that some of them called Ibn Khuzayma’s
book ‘The Book of Heresy.’32 In his Fadā’il al-sahāba, Ibn Hanbal includes a report stating
that ‘Alī’s name is written on the doorway to Paradise, a hadith rejected by Sunni scholars as
forged.33
The question of why hadith scholars would knowingly include unreliable or obviously forged
reports in any of their books is a perpetual quandary in the study of the hadith tradition and will
be discussed in depth in the next chapter. In the context of books exhorting Sunnis to the proper
beliefs and worldview, however, it makes sense from the authors’ standpoint. These books
were often polemics aimed at other sects, such as Muslim rationalists (known as Mu‘tazilites)
or Shiites. Sunni compilers of these books were not trying to prove anything to other Sunnis,
who shared their system of hadith evaluation. They ‘knew’ they were upholding the correct set
of beliefs, so they packed their books with whatever evidence they could find to support them
regardless of its reliability. Authors of books of sunna were arguing that, instead of relying on
reason, Muslims should believe in material transmitted from the Prophet no matter what it
said. A hadith about God’s throne squeaking was as useful in this cause as more reliable
hadiths.

 THE HADITH CANON
It would be some time before the landmark contribution of the sahīh and sunan books was
recognized. By the dawn of the eleventh century, however, a selection of these books had been
recognized as authoritative. This canon of books would fulfill two important functions in
Islamic civilization: providing a common language for discussing the Prophet’s Sunna and
providing a manageable representation of the vast hadith corpus.
Surprisingly, al-Bukhārī’s and Muslim’s decision to compile books limited only to hadiths
they deemed authentic was initially rejected by many ahl al-hadīth scholars. This seems
counterintuitive from a modern standpoint; why would a tradition that prided itself on
following the authentic legacy of the Prophet object to books of only authentic hadiths? In order
to understand this we must remember that, for the ahl al-hadīth, authentic hadiths only
represented the most reliable end of the hadith spectrum. Hadiths with less stellar isnāds were
also used in law, and weak hadiths were used very commonly in preaching, Quranic exegesis,
and books of zuhd and good manners.
Many ahl al-hadīth scholars during al-Bukhārī’s and Muslim’s time therefore criticized the
compilation of the Sahīhayn. A famous hadith scholar from Rayy in Iran, Abū Zur‘a al-Rāzī (d.
264/878), said of the two authors, ‘These are people who wanted prominence before their
time, so they did something of which they could boast; they wrote books the likes of which
none had written before to gain for themselves precedence.’ The ahl al-hadīth also worried
that if hadith scholars wrote books limited to authentic hadiths, their opponents from the ahl al-
ra’y would use that as a weapon against them. Abū Zur‘a described Muslim as ‘making a path
for the people of heresy against us, for they see that they can respond to a hadith that we use as
proof against them by saying “That is not in the Sahīh!” ’ Under fire from such critics, al-
Bukhārī and Muslim defended themselves by saying that their books did not include all the
sahīh hadiths in circulation. Al-Bukhārī had only selected sahīh hadiths useful for his legal
discussions, and Muslim had limited his book to hadiths whose authenticity he believed was
agreed on by all.34
By the mid tenth century, however, the contribution of the sahīh/sunan movement was
beginning to be realized. Previously, it was the collectors of the great musnads, al-Bukhārī’s
and Muslim’s teachers like Ibn Hanbal and al-Humaydī, who had been viewed as the pillars of
hadith scholarship. In the late 900s, however, Ibn Manda of Isfahan (d. 395/1004–5)
announced that the four masters of hadith were those who had produced the sahīh books: al-
Bukhārī, Muslim, Abū Dāwūd, and al-Nasā’ī. Ibn Manda described these four as well as
others of their generation as the group of hadith masters ‘accepted by all by consensus, and
their knowledge trumps all others.’35
The need for a selection of hadith collections acknowledged as superior by all the ahl al-
hadīth was essential at that point in time. In light of all the musannafs, musnads, and sunans in
circulation between the various cities that hadith scholars visited on their ‘travels in search of
knowledge,’ which books should students focus on as the foundation for understanding the
Prophet’s legacy? When a group of intimidated hadith students asked the Egyptian scholar Ibn
al-Sakan (d. 353/964) this question, he entered his house and reemerged with four books in his

 hands. ‘These are the foundations of Islam,’ he said, ‘the books of Muslim, al-Bukhārī, Abū
Dāwūd, and al-Nasā’ī.’36
Different scholars had different visions of which books best represented the Prophet’s Sunna.
These shifting canons are usually referred to as ‘The Five Books,’ ‘The Six Books,’ or ‘the
Authentic Books (al-Sihāh).’ The foundation of the canon, however, is unchanging: the four
works of al-Bukhārī, Muslim, Abū Dāwūd, and al-Nasā’ī. The Shāfi‘ī scholar Abū Bakr al-
Bayhaqī (d. 458/1066) adds that, together with these four, al-Tirmidhī’s and Ibn Khuzayma’s
books had identified a substantial amount of the authentic hadiths in circulation. Muhammad b.
Tāhir al-Maqdisī (d. 507/1113) described the Six Books as those of al-Bukhārī, Muslim, al-
Tirmidhī, al-Nasā’ī, Abū Dāwūd, and Ibn Mājah. ‘Abd al-Karīm al-Rāfi‘ī of Qazvīn (d.
623/1226) also enumerates this six-book series, as does the Indian Hanafī scholar al-Saghānī
(d. 650/1252), adding the Sunan of al-Dāraqutnī as well. The Andalusian hadith scholar, al-
Saraqustī (d. 524/1129), on the other hand, counts the Six Books as those of al-Bukhārī,
Muslim, al-Tirmidhī, Abū Dāwūd, al-Nasā’ī, and Mālik. Al-Silafī of Alexandria (d.
576/1180), Abū Bakr al-Hāzimī (d. 584/1188-9), and al-Nawawī mention only Five Books:
the works of al-Bukhārī, Muslim, al-Tirmidhī, Abū Dāwūd, and al-Nasā’ī.37 Together, the Six
Books contain approximately 19,600 hadiths (around 35,000 with repetitions).
The flexible boundaries of the hadith canon make sense when we consider one of its two
primary functions. Even as early as 800 CE, al-Shāfi‘ī had said that it was impossible for one
person to know all the hadiths in circulation.38 If the Prophet’s Sunna was essentially
boundless, the Muslim community needed a tangible and manageable selection of hadith books
to represent its core. Whether the canon was five or six books, or exactly which books these
were, did not affect this function.
In the 1200s and 1300s the hadith canon’s ability to represent the Prophet’s blessings
endowed the Sahīhayn in particular with a special ritual relevance. In cities from Damascus to
Timbuktu the Sahīhayn would be read in mosques as part of celebrations culminating in the
month of Ramadan. Al-Bukhārī’s Sahīh in particular was read as a cure for illness from Egypt
to India, and the great Moroccan conqueror Mawlā Ismā‘īl (d. 1727) had a copy of the Sahīh
carried in front of his army ‘like the Ark of the Children of Israel.’39
The second, more important function of the hadith canon was limited to the Sahīhayn – the
only two books of the canon which included exclusively authentic hadiths. These two books
served as a common reference for determining hadith authenticity. In the early 1000s the two
schools of law that had emerged from the ahl al-hadīth, the Hanbalī and the Shāfi‘ī, agreed
that the contents of the Sahīhayn were totally authentic and had been agreed upon as such by the
whole Muslim community. Scholars of the Mālikī school soon agreed, and by the 1300s even
the hadith-wary Hanafī school had found acknow-ledging this convention unavoidable. For all
the Sunni schools of law and theology, the Sahīhayn would be the common language for
evaluating the authenticity of hadith in interschool debates.
The Sahīhayn canon was an ideal polemical weapon to use against one’s opponents. But that
did not mean that scholars felt they had to obey all the hadiths found in the two collections in
their own work. If a scholar of the Shāfi‘ī or Hanafī school of law found a hadith in al-

 Bukhārī’s or Muslim’s collections that he disagreed with, he had no compunction about
criticizing its authenticity.40
The Sahīhayn were thus not immune to criticism. Only in the early modern and modern
periods has it become controversial to criticize the Sahīhayn, but this is primarily due to
Muslim scholars’ eagerness to protect the status of two books that they see as symbols of an
Islamic tradition under attack from modernity. It is import-ant to note here, as will be discussed
further below, that Muslim scholars recognized that other sahīh hadiths existed outside the
hadith canon.
THE PINNACLE OF HADITH COLLECTION AND THE END OF HADITH TRANSMISSION
As al-Bukhārī’s and Muslim’s critics had insisted, the sahīh movement did not mean the end of
hadith transmission and collection. Nor did it mean that Muslims believed that all the sahīh
hadiths in circulation had been recorded. In fact, from the standpoint of volume, the peak of
hadith collection occurred in the tenth century – over one hundred years after the Six Books
had been written.
Indeed, the compilation of titanic personal musnads continued after and even despite the
sahīh movement, with scholars in Iran continuing the tradition of collecting musnads with many
weak and even forged hadiths. Abū al-Qāsim al-Tabarānī (d. 360/971) of Isfahan compiled a
huge collection, his Mu‘jam al-kabīr, which is today printed in twenty-eight volumes. ‘Alī b.
Hamshādh of Nishapur (d. 338/950) produced a personal musnad twice as large as al-
Tabarānī’s, and al-Hasan al-Māsarjisī of Nishapur (d. 365/976) compiled a musnad that if
published today would occupy an astounding 182 volumes.41 Even as late as the mid 1100s
Shahrudār b. Shīrawayh al-Daylamī (d. 558/1163) compiled a famous hadith collection
entitled Musnad al-Firdaws (The Musnad of Paradise).
Into the 1000s scholars with strong affiliations to certain schools of law produced massive
sunans and musnads to bolster their schools’ bodies of substantive law. The vast Sunan al-
kubrā of the Shāfi‘ī Abū Bakr al-Bayhaqī (d. 458/1066) is a landmark in the Shāfi‘ī legal
school, supporting every detail of its law code with a
myriad of reports from the Prophet and his Companions. Abū al-‘Abbās al-Asamm of Nishapur
(d. 346/957) collected all the hadiths that al-Shāfi‘ī had transmitted with full isnāds in his
magnum opus, the Umm, and organized them into the Musnad al-Shāfi‘ī.42 Even a non-Hanafī
like Abū Nu‘aym al-Isbahānī (d. 430/1038) participated in efforts to find chains going back to
the Prophet for Abū Hanīfa’s reports and composed a musnad collection of them.43 A much
larger musnad of the famous jurist’s narrations was compiled by al-Khwārazmī (d. 655/1257).
The Mālikī scholar Ibn al-Jabbāb (d. 322/934) created a musnad of Mālik’s hadiths.44
All these scholars continued to transmit hadiths in the great mosques of Iraq and Iran before
audiences of hundreds and even thousands of students. These ‘dictation sessions’ were
recorded by students in collections called amālī (dictations). The chief judge of Kufa, al-
Husayn b. Ismā‘īl al-Mahāmilī (d. 330/942), was described as the most knowledgeable person
in hadith of his time and was famous for his amālī.45 Abū al-‘Abbās al-Asamm was equally
well known for his dictation sessions.

 Not only did hadith transmission and collection continue unabated after the sahīh movement,
scholars continued to identify hadiths that they felt merited the title of sahīh and that al-Bukhārī
and Muslim should have included in their works. The great hadith scholar of Baghdad, Abū al-
Hasan al-Dāraqutnī (d. 385/995) and the Mālikī hadith master of the Hejaz, Abū Dharr al-
Harawī (d. 430/1038), both wrote one-volume collections called ilzāmāt (addendums) of
hadiths that they considered up to the standards of the Sahīhayn. Al-Dāraqutnī’s student, al-
Hākim al-Naysābūrī (d. 405/1014), compiled a voluminous ilzāmāt work entitled al-
Mustadrak (with approximately 8,800 hadiths) in which he sought, once and for all, to
demonstrate to those opponents of the ahl al-hadīth the multitude of authentic hadiths that
remained outside the Sahīhayn.46
By the mid 1000s, however, it was clear that the process of recording the hadiths in
circulation – regardless of whether they were authentic or forgeries – was coming to an end. In
the mid eleventh century, al-Hākim’s student al-Bayhaqī declared that all the hadiths that could
reliably be attributed to the Prophet had been documented, and thus any previously unrecorded
attributions to Muhammad should be considered de facto forgeries.47 In practice, in the 1100s
we see that fewer and fewer hadith scholars were able to record hadiths with full isnāds (even
highly unreliable hadiths) back to the Prophet that had not already been written down in some
earlier collection. Ibn al-Jawzī of Baghdad (d. 597/1201), for example, is the only person to
have transmitted the admittedly unreliable hadith ‘Sweeping the mosque is the dowry for
heavenly beauties (kans al-masājid muhūr al-hūr al-‘īn).’ The last hadiths that I have seen
recorded with full
isnāds are found in the Tadwīn fī akhbār Qazwīn (Recording the History of the City of Qazvin)
of ‘Abd al-Karīm al-Rāfi‘ī (d. 623/1226): ‘Civil strife (fitna) is sleeping, and God curses
whomever wakes it,’ and ‘Sanjar will be the last of the Persian kings; he will live eighty
years and then die of hunger.’ (Sanjar was the Seljuq sultan of Persia; he died in 1157 CE at
around seventy-five).48 Even this second report is undoubtedly forged. By the 1300s, not even
the greatest hadith scholars of their day such as Shams al-Dīn al-Dhahabī (d. 748/1348) or
Jamāl al-Dīn al-Mizzī (d. 742/1341) would dare to claim that they were in possession of a
hadith reliably said by the Prophet that had gone unnoticed until their time.
THE PRACTICE OF HADITH TRANSMISSION AND CONNECTION TO THE PROPHET AFTER THE HADITH
CANON
In the early period of the hadith tradition the importance of oral transmission, or ‘audition
(samā‘)’, where the student either read the hadith to his teacher or vice versa, had been very
practical. One had to hear hadiths through a chain of teachers (isnād) because the Arabic script
was too ambiguous to assure the correct understanding of any written document. The practical
emphasis on oral transmission – only accepting material if it came through a living isnād of
transmitters – was equally applicable to whole books of hadiths. The transmission of a book
required the same care and concern as the transmission of an individual hadith, and collections
like Sahīh al-Bukhārī or Mālik’s Muwatta’ were transmitted from teacher to student in the
same manner as hadiths.

 For hadith scholars, any referral to a hadith collection was contingent on hearing it from a
chain of transmitters back to the author. A book could not simply be taken off the shelf and
used. Like a single report, only a student copying a text in the presence of his teacher could
protect against the vagaries and errors of transmission. Abū Bakr al-Qatī‘ī (d. 368/979), who
was the principal transmitter of Ibn Hanbal’s Musnad, was severely criticized for transmitting
one of Ibn Hanbal’s books from a copy which he had not heard directly from his teacher, Ibn
Hanbal’s son. Although al-Qatī‘ī had in fact heard this book from his teacher previously, the
copy he had used was destroyed in a flood, leaving him with only the other non-samā‘ copy.
This case demonstrates the sensitivity of hadith scholars to the question of oral transmission.
Even a respected scholar who had actually heard a book from his teacher could be criticized
for relying on another copy if he had not read that copy in the presence of his teacher (since he
would not have been able to make any corrections to it). The scholar who transmitted the
Musnad from al-Qatī‘ī, Ibn al-Mudhhib (d. 444/1052–3), was also accused of lax transmission
practices. Specifically, he did not have samā‘ for certain sections of the Musnad. Later
scholars thus explained that, because of this, ‘material with unreliable texts (matn) and isnāds
entered into the Musnad.’49 In the ninth, tenth, and eleventh centuries the isnād to the book was
thus as important as the isnāds contained within the book for authenticating its hadiths. Oral
transmission was the key to maintaining these isnāds.
In the 1000s, however, the fact that hadith collections such as the Six Books had become so
well known and widely transmitted meant that scholars could relax the practical strictures of
oral transmission. Sahīh al-Bukhārī was sufficiently widespread that if alterations were made
to any one copy of the book there existed enough other transmissions of the book to identify this
error. Although devout hadith scholars would maintain into the thirteenth century that one could
not simply pick up a book of hadith and read it without having heard it from a transmitter via an
isnād, Sunni scholars not specializing in hadith found this unnecessarily cumbersome. By the
mid 1000s revered Sunni theologians and jurists like Abū Hāmid al-Ghazālī (d. 505/1111) and
his teacher al-Juwaynī (d. 478/1085) had declared that if one found a well-copied text of al-
Bukhārī’s Sahīh one could read and use it without an isnād to the book.50
Even among scholars focused narrowly on the study of hadith, in the 1000s the practice of
ijāza (permission for transmission) began to supersede samā‘ as the medium of the isnād.
Ijāza for transmission meant that instead of reading an entire hadith collection in the presence
of an authorized transmitter, a student might only read part of it and receive ‘permission’ from
the teacher to transmit the rest. Although it was a less rigorous form of authentication, ijāza
still provided scholars with isnāds for books. Although this practice had existed in some forms
even in the ninth century, by the mid 1000s it had become very common. Al-Hākim al-
Naysābūrī, author of the massive Mustadrak, thus gave a group of students an ijāza to transmit
his works provided they could secure well-written copies of them.51
Of course, if you could get an ijāza for a book you had not actually read in the presence of a
teacher, you could get ijāzas for any number of books that the teacher was able to transmit.
This led to the practice of acquiring a ‘general ijāza (ijāza ‘āmma)’ for all the books a teacher
had. In the 1000s many scholars also accepted the practice of getting ijāzas from teachers one

 had not actually met at all through writing letters. This ‘ijāza for the non-present person (ijāzat
al-ma‘dūm)’ meant that scholars could acquire ijāzas for their infant children or even for
children not yet born!
This ijāza for transmission (ijāzat al-riwāya) should not be mistaken for another, much less
easily attained form of ijāza in Islamic civilization, ‘the ijāza of knowledge (ijāzat al-dirāya).’
The ijāza of transmission served only to preserve the tradition of the isnād, while the ijāza of
knowledge showed that a teacher acknowledged that a student had mastered a text and was
able to teach its contents to others.
It is evident from these developments that by the late eleventh century the transmission of
hadiths and books via a living isnād possessed little practical value. Why then did it continue?
Simply put, the foundational principle of the Islamic tradition, that authority comes through a
connection to God and His Prophet, still dominated Muslim scholarly culture. The isnād was
that chain that connected a scholar to the Prophet and allowed him to act as an authoritative
interpreter of Islam. Hearing a hadith or a book of hadiths by an isnād, even if by ijāza,
breathed a soul into otherwise lifeless pages and rendered the book legally compelling. One
Arabic poem describes someone reading a book without receiving it from a teacher as
‘someone trying to light a lamp with no oil.’52 The Andalusian scholar Ibn Khayr al-Ishbīlī (d.
575/1179) thus stated that no one could introduce a statement with the formula ‘the Prophet
said…’ without possessing some personal chain of transmission, even if by ijāza, back to the
Prophet for that report.53
The isnād conveyed authority in Muslim scholarly culture, and it is no coincidence that
acquiring and possessing isnāds was one of the means by which the Muslim scholarly elite
could distinguish themselves from the laity. One of the reasons that Ibn Khayr al-Ishbīlī gave
for requiring some form of isnād for quoting the Prophet was the phenomenon of uneducated
simpletons preaching in mosques instead of qualified scholars. Receiving isnāds for books and
hadiths was the equivalent of being ordained into the priesthood, and it is no surprise that even
today at the Islamic Institute in Kerala, India, the graduation ceremony for Muslim scholars
involves the rector of the school reading them his isnād for a hadith that involves the
transmitters, all the way back to the Prophet, investing the student to whom they recited the
hadith with the turban of a scholar.
Perhaps the last large hadith book to include full isnāds for every hadith it included was the
Ahādīth al-mukhtāra (Selected Hadiths) of Diyā’ al-Dīn al-Maqdisī (d. 643/1245). But even
this book did not include previously unrecorded hadiths. The author’s isnāds for his hadiths
consist of his isnāds to earlier hadith collections, which then continue from the author of those
collections back to the Prophet. After the 1200s, hadith scholars would cultivate their own
full- length isnāds back to the Prophet in small booklets produced only for the pietistic purpose
of linking themselves to his blessings and imitating the great hadith scholars of yore. As Muhyī
al-Dīn al-Nawawī described it, collecting isnāds back to the Prophet is an act of ‘preserving
the isnād, which is one of the unique features of the Muslim community.’54 The famous hadith
scholar of Cairo, Zayn al-Dīn al-‘Irāqī (d. 806/1404), thus conducted occasional amālī
sessions in an effort to imitate the practice of earlier hadith scholars. In the twentieth century,

 the Moroccan hadith scholar Ahmad al-Ghumārī (d. 1960) recited hadiths with full isnāds back
to the Prophet in dictation sessions in Cairo’s al-Husayn Mosque. Today, the practice of
transmitting hadiths is carried out by hearing hadiths known as musalsalāt, or hadiths always
transmitted in a certain context. The first hadith a student hears from his teacher is known as the
hadīth al-musalsal bi’l-awwaliyya, ‘the hadith always transmitted first’: ‘God the Most
Merciful is merciful towards those who act with mercy – be merciful on the earth and He
that is in the heavens will be merciful with you’ (see Chapter 1).
Historically, transmitting hadiths via full isnāds back to the Prophet carried another
advantage as well. Not only did the chain connect one to Muhammad himself, it also linked one
to all the great scholars of the past through whom the isnād passed. The staunchly orthodox
thirteenth-century Sufi ‘Umar al-Suhrawardī (d. 632/1234) began most of the chapters of his
popular manual on Sufism, ‘Awārif al-ma‘ārif, with hadiths that reached all the way back to
the Prophet through major figures in the Sufi tradition, such as Abū al-Qāsim al-Qushayrī (d.
465/1072) and Abū Nu‘aym al-Isbahānī.55 These scholars had recorded their hadiths in book-
form, but the religious capital gained by providing living isnāds for hadiths transmitted through
them proved more compelling to al-Suhrawardī than simply citing their books.
Isnāds thus linked scholars to the great figures who had preceded them in Islamic civilization
and allowed one to speak with their voices as well as that of the Prophet. As the great Sufi of
the sixteenth century, al-Sha‘rānī (d. 1565 CE) said, someone with an isnād ‘is like a link in
the chain, whenever he moves on any matter the whole chain, up to our master the Messenger
of God, moves with him.’56
ELEVATION IN ISNĀDS, AUTHORITY, AND PRECEDENCE IN POST-CANONICAL HADITH TRANSMISSION
After the late tenth and eleventh centuries CE the primary purpose of the isnād was to provide
a connection to the Prophet’s authority and establish a person as part of the Muslim scholarly
class. As a result, one’s proximity to the Prophet in the isnād and access to hadiths that other
scholars lacked served as marks of precedence in the scholarly community. Like the
importance of oral transmission (samā‘), the notion of a short or ‘elevated (‘ālī)’ isnād began
as a very practical concern for hadith authenticity: the fewer the links in the isnād to the
Prophet, the fewer opportunities for error in transmission to occur. Hence we find even an
early collector like Ibn Abī Shayba (d. 235/849) exhorting scholars that ‘seeking elevated
isnāds is part of religion.’57
By the mid 900s CE, however, seeking elevated isnāds had become a goal in its own right. In
a society where connection to the Prophet was the source of both authority and blessing, the
proximity of that connection was very valuable. As one early hadith scholar phrased it, ‘A
close isnād is closeness to God.’58 As in any society, Muslim religious scholars and pious
individuals established a system of honors and valuable items that individuals could earn or
attain; like educational degrees, Muslim scholars sought out shorter and shorter isnāds, rarer
and rarer hadiths, as a way to gain precedence, fame, and respect in their religious culture.
Like coin collectors fretting over acquiring rarities, Muslims flocked to those scholars lucky
enough to hear old hadith transmitters as young children, or who had heard a rare hadith from a

 certain transmitter from a faraway land. Such people could offer young Muslim scholars, eager
to earn their place among the scholarly elite or merely to feel especially connected to their
Prophet, a chance at excellence.
Of course, in none of these cases did the authenticity of the hadith in question actually matter
– hadith scholars could distinguish themselves by their short isnāds and their rare hadiths
regardless of whether or not these isnāds were reliable or the rare hadiths were baseless. To
return to the analogy of coin collecting, it is the rarity of the coin and its condition (analogous
to the elevation of an isnād) not the original value of the coin (or the authenticity of the hadith)
which matter to the collector.
Perhaps the most prominent example of a hadith scholar who prioritized elevated isnāds and
rare hadiths far above authenticity was al-Tabarānī (d. 360/971), who began hearing hadiths
from teachers at the age of thirteen and died at the age of one hundred. Of his many hadith
collections, his three mu‘jams (see below), one large, one medium, and one small, are
testimonies to his priorities in hadith study. In the small and medium collections, al-Tabarānī
follows most narrations with a brief discussion of how rare that narration is.
Al-Tabarānī’s isnāds border on the impossibly short. While ninth-century scholars like al-
Bukhārī generally narrated by isnāds of four, five, six, or seven transmitters to the Prophet (and
in al-Bukhārī’s case, twenty-eight instances where he narrated by only three), one hundred
years later al-Tabarānī still regularly narrated hadiths with four-person isnāds. In one case we
find him narrating a hadith via only three people: Ja‘far b. Hamīd al-Ansārī 
 his grandfather
‘Umar b. Abān 
 the Companion Anas b. Mālik, who showed him how to perform ablutions
like the Prophet.
Of course, later Muslim critics cast aside this isnād as inauthentic since Ja‘far b. Hamīd was
unknown to anyone but al-Tabarānī.59 But in a scholarly culture where proximity to the Prophet
granted precedence regardless of authenticity, al-Tabarānī was the most sought after hadith
transmitter of his time. The last of his students to die was one Ibn Rīdha (d. 440/1049), and the
most long-lived person to hear al-Tabarānī’s collections from him was a woman named Fātima
al-Jūzdāniyya (d. 514/1120). If you were lucky enough to receive ijāza from Fātima as a child
for al-Tabarānī’s hadiths, you could be living in the late 1100s, some 550 years after the
Prophet had died, with only six degrees of separation between you and him!
Two other famous hadith collections that embody the desire for connection to the Prophet,
whatever the authenticity, in this period are the Musnad al-Shihāb (The Meteor Musnad) of the
Egyptian al-Qudā‘ī (d. 454/1062) and the Musnad al-Firdaws of al-Daylamī (d. 558/1163).
These books represent some of the last large hadith collections to feature full-length isnāds, but
their contents are on the whole so unreliable that later scholars devoted whole books to the
forged hadiths they contained and assumed any hadith cited from the books to be weak.60
Today, the shortest realistic isnāds include twenty intermediaries to the Prophet. As al-
Tabarānī’s impossibly short isnād suggests, however, a chain of transmission can be as short as
one is willing to believe. A great cultivator of isnāds in the early modern period, Murtadā al-
Zabīdī (d. 1791), claimed to have heard a hadith via an isnād of two jinn (supernatural beings
living alongside humans, the origin of our word ‘genie’) from the Prophet.61 A modern hadith

 scholar from Morocco, ‘Abdallāh al-Ghumārī (d. 1993), noted that while teaching in Fez he
had met a man who claimed to have heard hadiths from his grandfather, who had heard hadiths
from al-Zabīdī.62 If we combine this with the jinn’s isnād, this would mean that in the 1990s al-
Ghumārī had a hadith from the Prophet narrated by only five intermediaries! Of course, neither
al-Zabīdī nor al-Ghumārī believed that such transmissions were reliable enough to be the basis
for law or dogma (as we’ll see, jinn could not be pinned down to be evaluated as transmitters).
They believed that jinn existed, however, so these isnāds were worth collecting for the
blessing (baraka) of having a close, albeit tenuous, connection to the Prophet.
Women and hadith transmission
The transmission of hadith collections and even the compilation of new ones with very
elevated isnāds in the post-canonical era was an area in which women could excel. Because
they often lived longer than men, women could become the most sought after transmitters of
books. Major hadith scholars like al-Khatīb al-Baghdādī traveled to Mecca to read Sahīh al-
Bukhārī in the presence of Karīma al-Marwaziyya (d. 463/1071), who had an especially
elevated isnād to the book, and Fātima al-Jūzdāniyya was the main transmitter of al-Tabarānī’s
works. Until her death in 2008, Muslim students flocked to a small village in Yemen’s
Hadramawt Valley to receive a hadith ijāza from the 105-year-old woman Safiyya
al-‘Amdiyya.
Independent collections of hadiths by women were very rare; in the early period of hadith
they were non-existent. But we know of at least two selections of hadiths from the post-
canonical period compiled by women. A twelfth-century woman named Shuhda al-Kātiba (d.
574/1178–9) put together a list of 115 hadiths that she picked from books she had been
authorized to transmit, often with shorter isnāds than the hadiths in the actual books
themselves.63 The Musnad of Amat Allāh Miryam al-Hanbaliyya of Nablus (d. 758/1357) has
also survived until today.
MU‘JAMS, THABATS, AND THE CVS OF HADITH SCHOLARS
With the transformation of hadith transmission and collection into a means of connection to the
Prophet and status in the scholarly community, hadith collections emerged that were structured
to display the breadth of a hadith scholar’s learning. Mu‘jams were books of hadiths in which
the author chose a certain theme and then provided as many hadiths as possible to demonstrate
the breadth of his hadith corpus within that theme. In a sense, the mu‘jam functioned as
curriculum vitae of the hadith scholar, displaying the range of teachers with whom he had
studied, the rarity of his hadiths, and the elevation of his isnāds. Mu‘jams had emerged in the
ninth century, with Abū al-Qāsim al-Baghawī’s (d. 317/929–30) Mu‘jam al-sahāba, where the
author provided one hadith from him all the way back to each Companion. The mu‘jam came
into its own as a genre, however, in the tenth to the twelfth centuries.
A common theme for a mu‘jam was a mu‘jam al-shuyūkh (mu‘jam of teachers), or a
collection where the author provided one hadith with a full isnād through each of his teachers.
An early example of this is the Mu‘jam al-shuyūkh of Abū Bakr al-Ismā‘īlī (d. 371/981–2) and

 the Mu‘jam al-saghīr (small mu‘jam) of al-Tabarānī. A mu‘jam al-shuyūkh could be massive
and contain far more than merely hadiths: the mu‘jam composed by Abū Sa‘d al-Sam‘ānī (d.
562/1166) is published in four volumes and contains hadiths, information about his teachers’
lives, and the books they studied and wrote, as well as about his own studies.
Other mu‘jams were designed to display the breadth of a scholar’s travels in the search of
hadiths. One scholar of the 1100s who was particularly well known for his elevated isnāds and
wide travel (born in Iran, he eventually settled in Alexandria), Abū Tāhir al-Silafī (d.
576/1180) wrote three mu‘jams, one for his teachers in his native Isfahan, one for those in
Baghdad, and one for the teachers he had heard from on his travels (the Mu‘jam al-safar).
With the end of the general practice of writing hadith collections with full isnāds in the late
twelfth and early thirteenth centuries, the hadith scholar’s CV shifted away from using the
isnāds of hadiths to demonstrate wide learning to using the isnāds of books. In the mid 1100s
we thus see the emergence of thabats, or collections in which a scholar listed all his isnāds to
the books he had received permission to transmit from his teachers, in the place of mu‘jams.
Early thabats include that of the famous Andalusian hadith scholars al-Qādī ‘Iyād b. Mūsā (d.
544/1149) and Ibn Khayr al-Ishbīlī (d. 575/1179). Thabats would remain until modern times
the premier medium through which scholars could demonstrate their connection to the great
scholars of yesteryear, and through those books to the Prophet himself. In the twentieth century
the Moroccan hadith scholar Muhammad ‘Abd al-Hayy al-Kattānī (d. 1963) compiled the
Fahris al-fahāris, a thabat collection with isnāds to over one thousand earlier thabat
collections.
CHANNELING THE CONNECTION TO THE PROPHET: MUSTAKHRAJS, COMMENTARIES, LOCAL HISTORIES,
AND FORTY HADITH BOOKS
The capacity of hadith to function as a connection to the Prophet has allowed Muslim scholars
to channel and mold this charismatic medium to serve a variety of scholarly and non-scholarly
purposes. Hadiths have provided the material through which other discourses are constructed.
From the 900s to the present day, scholars have therefore used hadiths as a medium for
discussing any number of legal, doctrinal, or spiritual issues.
Mustakhrajs
The genre of mustakhraj books flourished from the late 800s until the early 1000s, during the
period in which the focus on elevated isnāds became pronounced. A mustakhraj involved a
hadith scholar taking an existing hadith collection and using it as a template for his own hadith
book; so for every hadith found in the template collection, the author of the mustakhraj would
provide his own narration of that hadith.
This seems counterintuitive – why would a scholar who had collected a large body of hadiths
not write his own collection in order to express his own legal or doctrinal worldview? The
reason for composing a mustakhraj becomes obvious when we consider the nature and
objectives of the genre. First, mustakhrajs appeared during the period when the hadith canon
was forming. As a result, collections such as the Sahīhayn and the Sunan of Abū Dāwūd were

 greatly sought after, and scholars would travel far and wide to hear the books from their
authorized transmitters. If a scholar was unable to hear the books from a transmitter with an
elevated isnād to its author, however, he would have to suffice with an unattractively long
isnād to the book.
Mustakhrajs provided a solution. By reconstituting the template collection with his own,
often elevated isnāds, a scholar could effectively possess the book without compromising the
quality of his isnād to it. Abū Nu‘aym al-Isbahānī states that he composed his mustakhraj of
Muslim’s Sahīh for the benefit of those who had ‘missed’ hearing that book from authorized
transmitters. A twelfth-century scholar who had heard al-Isbahānī’s mustakhraj bragged to
friends that some of the isnāds for hadiths in the book were so short that he was just as close to
the Prophet as Muslim had been.64
Second, authors of mustakhrajs used the template collection to display the authenticity and
elevation of their own isnāds. We thus find that the books used as template collections for
mustakhrajs were all products of the sahīh movement; dozens of mustakhrajs were produced
based on the Sahīhayn of al-Bukhārī and Muslim, with three on the Sunan of Abū Dāwūd, one
on al-Tirmidhī’s Jāmi‘ and one on the Sahīh of Ibn Khuzayma. The majority of mustakhrajs
based on the Sahīhayn thus attempted to replicate the criteria used for authenticity by al-
Bukhārī and Muslim. Finally, by selecting narrations of hadiths that varied slightly from the
template collections or adjusting the chapter titles, the authors of mustakhrajs could introduce
their own legal or doctrinal ideas into the text. In this sense, mustakhrajs were the first
generation of commentaries on hadith collections. In the mustakhraj genre, the template
collection served as a forum for the author to display the quality and elevation of his isnāds as
well as to express his own doctrinal and legal vision.
Commentaries
A commentary on a hadith collection, or sharh, served two general functions. First, scholars
composed such a work to assist students in the basic task of reading and understanding the
difficult phrases, names, and obscure meanings embedded in the isnāds and matns of a hadith
work. Second, commentaries provided scholars with an opportunity to elaborate in detail on
any legal, dogmatic, ritual, or historical issue that they found relevant to the hadiths in the book
they were discussing. The book commented on thus acted as a medium for a much more
expanded discussion in which the author could express his own vision of the Islamic
worldview.
The majority of hadith commentaries were devoted to books in the hadith canon. The earliest
known commentary was devoted to Mālik’s Muwatta’ by the Mālikī Abū Tāhir al-Umawī (d.
250/864). Two other very early examples are the Shāfi‘ī scholar Hamd al-Khattābī’s (d.
388/998) commentaries on the Sunan of Abū Dāwūd and on Sahīh al-Bukhārī. The first known
commentary on Muslim’s Sahīh was written by the North African scholar Muhammad b. ‘Alī
al-Māzarī (d. 536/1141), with one devoted to the Jāmi‘ al-Tirmidhī by another North African,
Abū Bakr b. al-‘Arabī (d. 543/1148). The first known commentary on Sunan Ibn Mājah came
from the Cairene Hanafī scholar Mughaltāy (d. 762/1361). Sunan al-Nasā’ī would have to

 wait until al-Suyūtī (d. 911/1505) devoted a commentary to it.
The most famous hadith commentaries overall are undoubtedly Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalānī’s (d.
852/1449) Fath al-bārī, a huge commentary on Sahīh al-Bukhārī, and al-Nawawī’s
commentary on Sahīh Muslim. Both are so encyclopedic in their discussion of the hadith-
science issues and broader questions raised in the Sahīhayn that Muslim scholars regularly cite
them instead of specialized books of law or theology.
Because commentaries provided such an excellent forum for legal discussion, the hadith
collections tied to specific schools of law also attracted them. Early commentaries on Mālik’s
Muwatta’ came from the Mālikī scholars Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr (d. 463/1060) of Lisbon and Abū
al-Walīd al-Bājī (d. 474/1081), both of whom wrote several commentaries of various sizes on
the work. Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr’s Kitāb al-tamhīd and the later work of al-Zurqānī (d. 1122/1710)
are the two best known commentaries on the Muwatta’. There have been occasional
commentaries on the Musnad of Abū Hanīfa, such as that of the Meccan Mullā ‘Alī Qārī (d.
1014/1606). Al-Suyūtī wrote a small commentary on the Musnad of al-Shāfi‘ī, and even the
massive Musnad of Ibn Hanbal has attracted occasional commentaries, such as that of the
Medinan scholar Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Hādī (d. 1726) or the Yemeni Abū al-Hasan al-Sindī
(d. 1728).
Commentaries attained an important station in the late 1300s, when writing one on al-
Bukhārī’s or Muslim’s Sahīh became the principal means for scholars throughout the Sunni
Muslim world to interact with the hadith tradition. At the peak of intellectual activity in
Mamluk Cairo in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, almost every hadith scholar of note
wrote a commentary on Sahīh al-Bukhārī, and in India from the 1600s onward writing a
commentary on one of the Sahīhayn was de rigueur for accomplished Muslim scholars.65
Hadith commentaries have continued to be written until modern times. The most famous
commentary on al-Tirmidhī’s Jāmi‘, the Tuhfat al-ahwadhī (The Gem of the Competant) of the
Indian Muhammad ‘Abd al-Rahmān al-Mubārakpūrī (d. 1935), is a regularly cited
encyclopedic source for Sunni Muslim scholars worldwide. The twenty-nine-volume Awjaz al-
masālik ilā Muwatta’ Mālik (ironically titled, The Shortest of Paths to Mālik’s Muwatta’),
written by the Indian Muhammad Zakariyyā Kāndahlawī (d. 1982) is the largest commentary
devoted to the one volume Muwatta’ of Mālik.
Sometimes scholars devoted commentaries to selections of hadiths they made themselves and
not to any existing books. The leading Hanafī hadith scholar of his time, the Egyptian Abū
Ja‘far al-Tahāwī (d. 321/933), wrote one commentary on hadiths of legal consequence to the
Hanafī school, the Sharh ma‘ānī al-āthār, and one on hadiths he found legally or doctrinally
problematic, the Sharh mushkil al-āthār. The Sufi Abū Bakr al-Kalābādhī (d. 384/994) wrote
a commentary on a selection of hadiths he found morally and spiritually important, the Bahr al-
fawā’id (Ocean of Benefits).
Local histories
From the late ninth century, scholars also began using hadiths as a medium for a less scholastic
topic: narrating the history of their native city, its virtues, and the accomplishments of its

 inhabitants. These local histories formed part of the larger genre of biographical dictionaries
that featured so prominently in Islamic civilization. In such works history is told through
collective biography.
Local histories generally set forth the history of a city, the people associated with it and its
role in the Islamic world. The introductory chapters on the virtues of the city usually included
outrageously patriotic forged hadiths. In the eleventh century, al-Hākim al-Naysābūrī and Abū
Nu‘aym al-Isbahānī wrote local histories on their respective cities of Nishapur and Isfahan,
both in Iran and both featuring this hadith: ‘The people with the greatest destiny in Islam are
the people of Persia (a‘zam al-nās nasīban fī al-islām ahl fāris).’66 Local histories then
generally list the famous inhabitants or visitors to the city in either chronological or
alphabetical order, providing biog-raphies for each entry.
Many local histories fit squarely within the genre of hadith literature because they focused on
the lives and accomplishments of hadith scholars, describing the teachers from whom they
heard hadiths and the students to whom they transmitted, and rating their reliability. Local
histories also included vast arrays of hadiths. The earliest known local history is the history of
Wāsit in southern Iraq (Tārīkh Wāsit) written by Aslam b. Sahl Bahshal (d. 292/905). The
work includes many hadiths, including the only known narration of the hadith through Ibn
Abbas in which the Prophet condemns speaking during the Friday prayer sermon.67
The most famous local histories rank among the largest books written in Islamic civilization.
The History of Baghdad (literally, The History of the City of Peace, Tārīkh madīnat al-
salām) of al-Khatīb al-Baghdādī (d. 463/1071) is fourteen printed volumes, while the
mammoth History of Damascus (Tārīkh madīnat Dimashq) of Ibn ‘Asākir (d. 571/1176) fills
eighty! Since the authors of these two books include at least one hadith for each entry, with a
full isnād from the author through the subject in question back to the Prophet, the History of
Baghdad and the History of Damascus are actually two of the largest and most important
hadith collections. As with musnads and mu‘jams, their authors were unconcerned with the
authenticity of hadiths in the books, and the works are thus indispensable sources for some of
the rarest and most bizarre hadiths in circulation.
Forty hadith collections
One the most common and enduring forms of using hadiths as a medium for scholarly or pious
expression has been books of Arba‘ūn hadīth, or ‘Forty Hadith’ books. Supposedly the first
Forty Hadith book was composed by the early scholar Ibn al-Mubārak (d. 181/797) on the
basis of a hadith that, although attributed to the Prophet through many narrations and
permutations, Muslims have agreed is unreliable: ‘Whoever memorizes for my community
forty hadiths from my Sunna, I will be his intercessor on the Day of Judgment (man hafiza
‘alā ummatī arba‘īn hadīthan min al-sunna kuntu lahu shafī‘an yawm al-qiyāma).’ Despite
its unreliability, this hadith has served consistently as a catalyst in Islamic scholarly culture,
and even Muslim scholars not known for any special interest in hadith have composed forty
hadith collections on its basis. Among the non-hadith specialists who did so are the famous
Shāfi‘ī legal theorist al-Juwaynī (d. 478/1085) and the seminal Sufi theosopher Ibn Arabi (d.

 638/ 1240). Some of the earliest known forty books are those of Ahmad b. Harb al-Naysābūrī
(d. 234/848) and Ibrāhīm b. ‘Alī al-Dhuhlī (d. 294/905).68
Like mu‘jams, forty hadith collections could be tailored to display the elevation or rarity of a
scholar’s hadiths or be devoted to specific topics. Ibn ‘Asākir and al-Silafī had forty hadith
collections with one hadith for each of the forty lands they had visited. Abū Nu‘aym al-
Isbahānī composed one with forty hadiths import-ant to Sufis and one with forty hadiths about
the Messiah (Mahdī). Muhammad b. Abd al-Rahman al-Tujīnī of Morocco (d. 610/1213)
wrote several forty hadith collections, including one on the topic of praying for the Prophet.
The most exorbitant displays of the breadth of a scholar’s hadith corpus are certainly the
forty hadith collections of Ibn al-Abbār (d. 658/1259) and Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Wāhid al-
Ghāfiqī (d. 619/1222), which were entitled ‘Forty hadiths from forty different teachers from
forty different books by forty different scholars via forty different isnāds to forty different
Successors, from forty different Companions with forty different names from forty different
tribes on forty different issues.’69 Convinced that all possible forty-hadith-book themes had
been exhausted, al-Hasan b. Muhammad al-Naysābūrī (d. 656/1258) replicated this same topic
but also drew his forty hadiths from forty different forty-hadith collections!70
One forty hadith book in particular, al-Nawawī’s ‘Forty Hadiths about the Principles of the
Religion (Arba‘ūn hadīth fī usūl al-dīn)’ is one of the most widely read books after the Quran
among Sunni Muslims. It has served as an important tool for scholars to instruct the masses and
has been the subject of numerous commentaries, such as the frequently studied Jāmi‘ al-‘ulūm
wa al-hikam (Compendium of the Sciences and Wisdoms) of Ibn Rajab (d. 795/1392) and Ibn
Hajar al-Haytamī’s (d. 974/1566) Fath al-mubin bi-sharh al-arba‘īn.
CONSOLIDATION AND ANALYSIS IN THE LATE SUNNI TRADITION
In the wake of the emergence of the hadith canon at the dawn of the eleventh century, a process
of consolidation and analysis began in parallel with the continued transmission of hadith as a
medium of connection to the Prophet. This consolidation and analysis entered a period of
exceptional activity with the solidification of what we can refer to as the Late Sunni Tradition,
or the version of Sunni orthodoxy that emerged in the 1300s and has characterized Islamic
civilization in the Middle East and South Asia until the modern period. It consists of an
institutional combination of the four Sunni schools of law, the Ash‘arī or Māturīdī schools of
speculative theology, and Sufi brotherhoods. A Muslim scholar in the Late Sunni Tradition
would loyally follow one of the established schools of law, one of the established schools of
speculative theology, and participate in one or more Sufi brotherhoods.
Digest collections
The emergence of the hadith canon resulted naturally in the composition of digest collections
that combined and consolidated the canon’s contents into a more manageable form. The first
digests addressed the core of the hadith canon: the two Sahīhs of al-Bukhārī and Muslim. An
Andalusian who moved to Baghdad, Muhammad b. Futūh al-Humaydī (d. 488/1095) combined
the Sahīhayn into one book, noting any material that one of the two books featured apart from

 the other. Zayn al-Dīn al-Zabīdī (d. 893/1488) later wrote a small one-volume digest of all the
hadiths of Sahīh al-Bukhārī, called Tajrīd al-Sahīh (Stripping Down the Sahīh), that removed
isnāds and any repetitions.
Ibn Razīn al-Saraqustī (d. 524/1129) of Saragossa produced a more thorough digest of what
he perceived as the hadith canon: the Sahīhayn and the books of Abū Dāwūd, al-Nasā’ī, al-
Tirmidhī and Mālik. The Syrian Ibn al-Athīr (d. 606/1210) replicated this work in his large
and very popular Jāmi‘ al-usūl min ahādīth al-rasūl, a copy of which the great Mongol grand
vizier Rashīd al-Dīn (d. 718/1318) ordered to be placed in the mosque he endowed as a
counterpart to the Quran. The famous scholar of Baghdad, Ibn al-Jawzī (d. 597/1201),
compiled a digest collection reflecting his loyalty to the Hanbali school; his Jāmi‘ al-masānīd
combined the hadiths of the Sahīhayn, the Sunan of al-Tirmidhī, and the Musnad of Ibn
Hanbal.71
Ibn Athīr’s Jāmi‘ al-usūl was a huge, multivolume work. Other digests were meant to be
portable, easily thumbed-through personal handbooks. Al-Husayn al-Baghawī (d. 516/1122),
known as ‘the Reviver of the Sunna,’ wrote his one-volume Masābīh al-sunna (Lamps of the
Sunna) for this purpose. He digested the canon into 4,434 hadiths, half of them from the
Sahīhayn.72 Organized topically, each chapter is divided into sahīh and the hasan (see next
chapter for discussion of these terms) hadiths. The work is so small because the author omitted
the isnāds, relying on the reputation of the books he drew on to vouch for the reliability of the
hadiths.73 Muhammad al-Khatīb al-Tabrīzī (d. c. 737/1337) added 1,511 hadiths to al-
Baghawī’s work in his expanded digest, the Mishkāt al-masābīh (Niche of the Lamps). The
Mishkāt became a standard hadith textbook for Muslim religious students, especially in India,
and was the subject of several commentaries, including the famous Mirqāt al-mafātīh sharh
Mishkāt al-masābīh of Mullā ‘Alī Qārī.
Supplemental collections
The Six Books contained approximately 19,600 traditions altogether (around 35,000 with
repetitions), but vast numbers remained in other works. While digest works sought to
consolidate the material within the canon, supplemental collections (kutub al-zawā’id) brought
material outside the canon within easy reach of scholars. In his Majma‘ al-zawā’id, the
Cairene scholar Nūr al-Dīn al-Haythamī (d. 807/1405) listed all hadiths from the Musnads of
Ibn Hanbal, Abū Ya‘lā al-Mawsilī, and al-Bazzār as well as the Mu‘jams of al-Tabarānī that
are not found in the Six Books, organized topically and without isnāds. Al-Haythamī also
evaluated the transmitters in the isnād of each supplemental hadith (but, note, not necessarily
the authenticity of the hadith itself!).74 In his Ithāf al- khayyira al-mahara bi-zawā’id al-
masānīd al-‘ashara, Ahmad al-Būsīrī (d. 840/1436) performed the same service for the
hadiths in the Muwatta’, the Musnad of al-Shāfi‘ī, Sunan al-Dārimī, Sunan al-Dāraqutnī,
Sahīh Ibn Khuzayma, Sahīh Ibn Hibbān, the Muntaqā of Ibn al-Jārūd, Abū ‘Awāna’s
Mustakhraj of Sahīh Muslim, the Mustadrak of al-Hākim, and the Sharh ma‘ānī al-āthār of
al-Tahāwī. In his Matālib al-‘āliya bi-zawā’id al-masānīd al-thamāniya, the great Ibn Hajar
al-‘Asqalānī (d. 852/1449) added the hadiths from a wide selection of less well-known early

 musnads: those of al-Tayālisī, al-Humaydī, Ibn Abī
‘Umar, al-Musaddad, Ahmad b. Manī‘, Ibn Abī Shayba, ‘Abd b.
Humayd, al-Hārith b. Abī Usāma, Ishāq b. Rāhawayh, and al-Rūyānī.75
With these supplemental collections at their disposal, Muslim scholars could easily reference
hadiths outside the canonical collections as well as the rulings of major late hadith masters on
their isnāds. Ibn Hajar attempted a comparable feat for sahīh hadiths. He compiled a work
called Zawā’id al-sunan al-arba‘a mimmā huwa sahīh (Supplements [to the Sahīhayn] from
what is Sahīh from the Four Sunan), but it seems not to have survived (sadly).76 The modern
Yemeni scholar Muqbil b. Hādī al-Wādi‘ī (d. 2001) performed a similar service in the modern
period; in his al-Jāmi‘ al-sahīh mimmā laysa fī al-Sahīhayn he collected all the hadiths he
deemed authentic but that are not found in al-Bukhārī’s and Muslim’s collections.
Mega-collections
Rather than collecting extra-canonical hadiths in manageable form, several late Sunni scholars
attempted the more ambitious task of encompassing the whole hadith corpus in one book. The
encyclopedic Shāfi‘ī scholar of Egypt, Jalāl al-Dīn al-Suyūtī (d. 911/1505), sought to
accomplish this after he had a dream in which the Prophet appeared to him and ordered him to
‘Bring forth the Sunna! Bring forth the hadiths!’77 Al-Suyūtī attempted this in his Jam‘ al-
jawāmi‘ (Consolidation of Compendia), also known as his Jāmi‘ al-kabīr. Tragically, al-
Suyūtī died before he completed this work, having collected some 100,000 hadiths in his draft.
What survived has been published in thirty volumes. In this work, the author synthesized the
contents of all the hadith collections available to him alphabetically according to the beginning
of the hadith (taraf) along with its isnād. The book stops about nine tenths of the way through
the alphabet, never reaching hadiths describing the Prophet’s actions. While still working on
this massive compendium, al-Suyūtī took all the hadiths (10,031 in total) documenting
Prophetic sayings (as opposed to actions), rated their authenticity (or most of them), and
combined them in a one-volume work called al-Jāmi‘ al-saghīr. This work has become one of
the most relied upon references for Muslim scholars not specializing in hadiths. Realizing he
had omitted some mater-ial, al-Suyūtī penned an addendum entitled al-Ziyāda ‘alā al-Jāmi‘ al-
saghīr.
The Indian scholar ‘Alī b. ‘Abd al-Malik Muttaqī (d. 975/1567) took the Jāmi‘ al-saghīr,
added hadiths that al-Suyūtī had missed as well as hadiths describing the Prophet’s actions and
rearranged them all topically in his massive Kanz al-‘ummāl fī sunan al-aqwāl wa al-af‘āl
(The Laborers’ Treasure from the Spoken and Acted Sunna). The Egyptian ‘Abd al-Ra’ūf al-
Munāwī (d. 1031/1622) estimated that al-Suyūtī had only succeeded in exhausting two thirds
of the extant Prophetic sayings and objected to the widespread belief that if a hadith was not in
the Jāmi‘ al-kabīr it did not exist. In his al-Jāmi‘ al-azhar min hadīth al-nabī al-anwar, al-
Munāwī therefore added in Prophetic sayings that al-Suyūtī had missed and also completed the
work from where al-Suyūtī had left off (at man taraka ...).78 Other late scholars also
complained about al-Suyūtī’s omissions; the Moroccan Abū ‘Alā’ al-Fāsī (d. 1770–1) wrote in
the margins of his copy of the Jāmi‘ al-kabīr over five thousand hadiths that al-Suyūtī had

 missed.
Indices/Atrāf collections
One of the most practical genres of books produced in the consolidation movement was that of
atrāf. The taraf (pl. atrāf) of a hadith was the first section of the matn or its most prominent
section. If a scholar knew the text of the hadith and had no other information about it, an index
of hadiths arranged according to atrāf would be the easiest way to find it. An atrāf work listed
the matn of the hadith and then provided all its various chains of transmission and the books in
which they appear.
As with other genres, atrāf collections took the Sahīhayn as the first subject. Abū Mas‘ūd al-
Dimashqī (d. 401/1010–11) and Khalaf al-Wāsitī (d. 400/1010) of Baghdad each wrote an
atrāf work for the hadiths included in al-Bukhārī’s and Muslim’s collections, although their
books were clearly not meant for people to use as accessible indices, since the works are
organized along musnad lines and not alphabetically. The Mālikī scholar of Andalusia,
‘Uthmān b. Sa‘īd al-Dānī (d. 444/1053) also wrote an early atrāf of the hadiths in the
Muwatta’.79
Ibn ‘Asākir composed a more useful and ultimately widely copied atrāf work of the Five
Book canon. Abū al-Fadl al-Maqdisī (d. 507/1113) wrote an atrāf book of the Six Books, but
it was not widely used. Jamāl al-Dīn al-Mizzī (d. 742/1341) wrote a much more
comprehensive atrāf of the Six Books (and several smaller, minor works) entitled Tuhfat al-
ashrāf bi-ma‘rifat al-atrāf (The Gem of the Noble for Knowing the Atrāf), which quickly
became a mainstay for scholars. It contains 19,626 hadiths. Al-Mizzī’s son-in-law, the famous
Ibn Kathīr (d. 774/1373) (no doubt attempting to impress his in-laws), compiled his Jāmi‘ al-
masānīd wa al-sunan al-hādī li-aqwam al-sunan, which added the atrāf of hadiths from the
musnads of Ibn Hanbal, al-Mawsilī, al-Bazzār, the Mu‘jam al-kabīr of al-Tabarānī, and the
Ma‘rifat al-sahāba of Abū Nu‘aym al-Isbahānī. Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalānī’s Ithāf al-mahara bi-
atrāf al-‘ashara listed all the atrāf of the hadiths that al-Būsīrī had included in his Ithāf al-
khayyira (see above section on Supplemental Collections).
Ahkām al-hadīth works
This genre included many fewer and less voluminous works than those composed in other
genres discussed here but has exercised a significant influence on Islamic scholarship. Ahkām
al-hadīth, or ‘the laws derived from hadith’ collections, were books that listed hadiths
regularly used in deriving Islamic law along with their ratings and the collections in which
they are found. Ahkām al-hadīth works also often included discussions of the hadiths’ legal
implications. This genre seems to have arisen in imitation of ahkām al-Qur’ān works, which
addressed the legal implications of Quranic verses. The first ahkām al-hadīth books are
Ahkām of the Andalusian scholar Ibn al-Tallā‘ (d. 497/1104) and the Ahkām al-sughrā (Small
Ahkām), al-Ahkām al-wustā (Medium Ahkām) and al-Ahkām al-kubrā (Large Ahkām) of the
Andalusian jurist and hadith scholar Ibn al-Kharrāt al-Ishbīlī (d. 581/1185). The famously
conservative Hanbali scholar of Jerusalem, ‘Abd al-Ghanī al-Maqdisī (d. 600/1203), wrote

 the very influential ‘Umdat al-ahkām (The Foundation of Rulings), which was expanded and
commented on by the Egyptian Ibn Daqīq al-‘Īd (d. 702/1302) in his Ihkām al-ahkām
(Bolstering the Rulings), which consisted of five hundred legal hadiths taken from the
Sahīhayn. The leading Hanbali scholar Majd al-Dīn b. Taymiyya (d. 653/1255, the grandfather
of the controversial reformer Taqī al-Dīn b. Taymiyya) wrote the three- volume Muntaqā al-
akhbār (Choice Reports), but the most influential ahkām al-hadīth book has been the Bulūgh
al-marām min adillat al-ahkām (Reaching the Aspiration for the Proofs of Legal Rulings) of
Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalānī.
Ahkām al-hadīth books were written as references and teaching tools for Muslim scholars of
religious law, but they became highly influential with the rise of the Salafī movements of
revival and reform in the eighteenth century until today (see Chapter 10). These movements
encourage a return to the original sources of Islam and highlight the importance of hadiths in
Islamic law and dogma. As a result, in many cities of the Muslim world cheap pocket-copies
of Bulūgh al-marām can be found in book stores as popular references for Muslims’ daily
lives. Two influential Yemeni scholars of the early modern period, Muhammad b. al-Amīr al-
San‘ānī (d. 1768) and Muhammad b. ‘Alī al-Shawkānī (d. 1834) devoted their commentaries,
Subul al-salām sharh Bulūgh al-marām and
Nayl al-awtār sharh Muntaqā al-akhbār, to the Bulūgh al-marām and al-Muntaqā
respectively. These commentaries have become frequently used references and textbooks for
the study of Islamic law today.
QUOTING GOD: HADĪTH QUDSĪ
Hadiths in which the Prophet quotes God’s speech constitute a species of hadiths known as
‘holy hadiths (hadīth qudsī).’ Famous ones include God saying ‘Spend [in charity], O son of
Adam, and I will spend on you … (anfiq yā ibn Ādam unfiq ‘alayk. …).’ Qudsī hadiths are
distinguished from the Quran in that they are not considered to be the literal word of God. Only
their meaning issues from God, while their wording comes from Muhammad. Muslims believe
that they were not revealed via the intermediacy of the angel Gabriel, as the Quran was.
Instead, the Prophet may have heard them during his Ascension to heaven (Mi‘rāj), in a dream
or through inspiration (ilhām).
Several scholars authored collections of hadīth qudsī: Ibn ‘Arabī’s (d. 638/1240) expanded
Forty Hadith collection, the Mishkāt al-anwār, consisted of 101 hadīth qudsī, and the Yemeni
Ibn al-Dayba‘ (d. 944/1537) also devoted a book to this type of report.80 ‘Abd al-Ra’ūf al-
Munāwī wrote a collection entitled al-Ithāfāt al-saniyya bi’l-ahādīth al-qudsiyya with 272
qudsī hadiths in it. Muhammad al-Madanī (d. 1786) added to that book, compiling a work with
the same title that included some 863 hadiths.
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
The best Arabic editions of major Sunni hadith collections come from Tradigital’s
Encyclopaedia of Hadith, which includes the Six Books, the Muwatta’, and the Musnad of Ibn

 Hanbal (in particular, Tradigital has produced critical editions of the Musnad and the Sunan of
Ibn Mājah), and from the Dār al-Ta’sīl publisher in Cairo. For Sahīh Muslim, however, the
most critical edition has been published by Muhammad Zuhayr al-Nāsir through Dār al-Minhāj.
There are several translations of major Sunni hadith collections. These include Mālik b.
Anas’s Al-Muwatta of Imam Malik ibn Anas, trans. Aisha Bewley (London: Kegan Paul Intl.,
1989); an excellent translation of the first chapters of Sahīh al-Bukhārī entitled Sahih al-
Bukhari, trans. Muhammad Asad (Lahore: Arafat Publications, 1938); a full translation can be
found in The Translation of the Meanings of Sahīh Bukhārī, trans. Muhammad Muhsin Khan
(Riyadh: Darussalam, 1997); an abridgement of Muslim’s Sahīh entitled Sahih Muslim, trans.
Aftab Shahryar (New Delhi: Islamic Book Service, 2004); Abū Dāwūd’s Sunan, trans. Ahmad
Hasan (Lahore: Sh. Muhammad Ashraf, 1984); and the Sunan of al-Nasā’ī, Sunan Nasā’ī,
trans. Muhammad Iqbal Siddiqi (Lahore: Kazi Publications, 1994); a selection of hadiths from
al-Bukhārī’s al-Adab al-mufrad entitled Moral Teachings of Islam: Prophetic Traditions from
al-Adab al-Mufrad (Walnut Creek, CA: Altamira Press, 2003); al-Nawawī’s famous Forty
Hadiths, trans. Ezzeddin Ibrahim and Denys Johnson-Davies (Cambridge, UK: Islamic Texts
Society, 1997); al-Tabrīzī’s Mishkāt al-masābīh in five volumes, trans. James Robson
(Lahore: Sh. Muhammad Ashraf, 1963). A selection of shamā’il have been translated into
English by Muhammad Zaynū as al-Shamā’il al-muhammadiyya (Fairfax, VA: Institute of
Islamic and Arabic Studies, 1995). The Riyadh publisher Dar al-Salam has published passable
translations of the entire Six Book Sunni hadith canon. Dar al-Salam has also translated Ibn
Hajar’s famous ahkām al-hadīth collection, Bulūgh al-marām (Riyadh, 1996). Al-Nawawī’s
Riyād al-sālihīn is translated as The Gardens of the Righteous, trans. Muhammad Zafrulla
Khan (London: Curzon Press, 1975).
An Indian hadith scholar, Shāh ‘Abd al-‘Azīz (d. 1824), wrote a history of hadith literature
from a Muslim perspective; it is published as The Gardens of Hadith Scholars, trans. Aisha
Bewley (Santa Barbara, CA: Turath Publishing, 2007). Although it is part of the sīra genre and
not hadith proper, the famous biography of the Prophet edited by Ibn Hishām has been
translated: The Life of Mohammad, trans. A. Guillaume (New York: Oxford University Press,
1978).
For discussions of the debates over writing hadiths and the import-ance of orality in early
Islamic history, see Michael Cook’s, ‘The Opponents of the Writing of Tradition in Early
Islam,’ Arabica 44 (1997): 437–530; and Gregor Schoeler’s The Oral and the Written in
Early Islam, trans. Uwe Vagelpohl (New York: Routledge, 2006). For an excellent discussion
about the importance of the isnād in Islam as a paradigm of connection, see William Graham’s
‘Traditionalism in Islam: An Essay in Interpretation,’ Journal of Interdisciplinary History 23,
3 (1993): 495–522 and Garrett Davidson’s Carrying on the Tradition: An Intellectual and
Social History of Post-Canonical Hadith Transmission (Brill, 2018). For a study of hadith
qudsī, see William Graham, Divine Word and Prophetic Word in Early Islam (The Hague:
Mouton, 1977). For a study of the early transmission of hadiths, see Scott Lucas, Constructive
Critics: H.adīth Literature and the Articulation of Sunnī Islam (Leiden: Brill, 2004). For a
new study on hadith commentary, see Joel Blecher’s Said the Prophet of God (University of

 California Press, 2018).
ENDNOTES
  1  Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr, Jāmi‘ bayān al-‘ilm wa fadlihi, vol. 2, p.36.
  2  Muhammad Abū Zahra, Ibn Hanbal, p. 239. For the original quote, see ‘Abdallāh b. Ahmad, Masā’il al-imām Ahmad Ibn
Hanbal riwāyat ibnihi, p. 438; al-Makkī, Qūt al-qulūb, vol. 1, p. 177.
  3  ‘Abdallāh al-Ghumārī, Tawjīh al-‘ināya li-ta‘rīf ‘ilm al-hadīth riwāya wa dirāya, p. 7.
  4  Shams al-Dīn al-Sakhāwī, Fath al-mughīth, vol. 4, p. 103.
  5  Yahyā Ibn Ma‘īn, Kitāb al-‘ilal wa ma‘rifat al-rijāl, p. 19.
  6  Al-Sakhāwī, Fath al-mughīth, vol. 4, p. 103.
  7  Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalānī, Fath al-bārī sharh Sahīh al-Bukhārī, vol. 11, p. 466. The Egyptian scholar ‘Abd al-Ghanī b. Sa‘īd
(d. 409/1019) found four hadiths with four Companions narrating from one another in the isnād; ibid., vol. 13, p. 15.
  8  Al-Sakhāwī, Fath al-mughīth, vol. 4, p. 103.
  9  Hammām b. Munabbih, Sahīfat Hammām b. Munabbih. Scholars like Juynboll have questioned the historicity of Hammām
b. Munabbih, since he would have had to have lived eighty or ninety years to play his supposed part in transmitting this
sahīfa. But that is not an outrageously long lifespan, considering that St. Antony of Egypt (d. 365) lived to ninety-four.
10  Sunan Abī Dāwūd: kitāb al-‘ilm, bāb fī kitāb al-‘ilm.
11  Al-Khatīb al-Baghdādī, Taqyīd al-‘ilm, p. 96.
12  Sunan Abī Dāwūd: kitāb al-‘ilm, bāb fī kitāb al-‘ilm.
13  Muhyī al-Dīn al-Nawawī, Sharh Sahīh Muslim, vol. 1, p. 357, al-Dhahabī, Siyar, vol. 3, p. 81.
14  Ibn Abī Hātim al-Rāzī, al-Jarh wa al-ta‘dīl, vol. 6, p. 336.
15  Al-Khatīb, al-Jāmi‘, vol. 2, p. 85.
16  Ibn Sa‘d, al-Tabaqāt al-kubrā, vol. 7, p. 448.
17  Sahīh al-Bukhārī: kitāb al-‘ilm, bāb kayfa yuqbad al-‘ilm; Nabia Abbott, Studies in Arabic Literary Papyri II:
Qur’ānic Commentary and Tradition, vol. 2, p. 26.
18  Abū Khaythama Zuhayr b. Harb, Kitāb al-‘ilm, p. 32; al-Khatīb, al-Jāmi’, vol. 2, pp. 71, 78–79.
19  Ibid., vol. 2. p. 81.
20  Muhammad Abd al-Rauf, ‘H.adīth Literature – I: The Development of the Science of H.adīth,’ p. 273; Abū al-Hasan ‘Alī
al-Qābisī, Muwatta’ al-imām Mālik.
21  Harald Motzki, ‘The Mus.annaf of ‘Abd al-Razzāq al-S.an‘ānī as a Source of Authentic Ah.ādīth of the First Century
A.H,’ pp. 3–4.
22  Ibn Abī Hātim al-Rāzī, al-Taqdima, pp. 31–32.
23  Ibn Nuqta, Kitab al-Taqyīd li-ma‘rifat ruwāt al-sunan wa al-masānīd, p. 161. For details on the numbers of hadiths in the
Musnad, see Christopher Melchert, ‘The Musnad of Ah.mad Ibn H.anbal,’ pp. 32–51.
24  Musnad Ibn Hanbal, vol. 6, p. 269.
25  See Muhammad Abd al-Rauf, ‘H.adīth Literature – I: The Development of the Science of H.adīth.’
26  Tāj al-Dīn al-Subkī, Tabaqāt al-shāfi‘iyya al-kubrā, vol. 2, p. 221.
27  Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalānī, Huda al-sārī, p. 661. The number of chapters (kitāb) in al-Bukhārī’s Sahīh varies depending on
recension (riwāyāt) of the book, though the content remains the same. The recension of Abū Dharr al-Harawī, for
example, has numerous chapters that only appear as subchapters (bāb) in others. The valuable copy made by al-Buqā‘ī in
the fifteenth century has seventy-three chapters, while the authoritative Sultāniyya-Amīriyya edition, printed by the
Ottoman sultan in 1895, has only forty three. Editions today are based on the Dutch scholar AJ Wensinck’s formatting of
ninety-eight chapters.
28  Shams al-Dīn al-Dhahabī, Siyar a‘lām al-nubalā’, vol. 13, p. 279.
29  Sahīh Muslim: muqaddima, introduction.
30  Abū Dāwūd al-Sijistānī, ‘Risālat al-imām Abī Dāwūd al-Sijistānī ilā ahl Makka fī wasf Sunanihi,’ p. 46.
31  Qādī ‘Iyād, Kitāb al-shifā, p. 153.
32  ‘Abdallāh b. Ahmad b. Hanbal, Kitāb al-sunna, p. 301; Muhammad Zāhid al-Kawtharī, Maqālāt al-Kawtharī, p. 404.
33  Ibn Hanbal, Kitāb fadā’il al-sahāba, vol. 2, p. 665.
34  Abū Zur‘a al-Rāzī, Abū Zur‘a al-Rāzī wa juhūduhu fī al-sunna al-nabawiyya, p. 2:674–676; Jonathan A. C. Brown, The
Canonization of al-Bukhārī and Muslim, pp. 92–94.
35  Ibn Manda, Shurūt al-a’imma, pp. 67–68.
36  Ibn ‘Asākir, Tārīkh madīnat Dimashq, vol. 58, p. 93.
37  Brown, The Canonization of al-Bukhārī and Muslim, p. 9. See also Brown, ‘The Canonization of Ibn Majah: Authenticity

 vs. Utility in the Formation of the Sunni Hadith Canon,’ Revue des mondes musulmans et de la Méditerranée 129, July
(2011): 169–81.
38  Muhammad b. Idrīs al-Shāfi‘ī, al-Risāla, pp. 42–43.
39  Brown, The Canonization of al-Bukhārī and Muslim, pp. 340–345.
40  Ibid., pp. 255–260.
41  Al-Dhahabī, Tadhkirat al-huffāz, vol. 3, pp. 50, 111.
42  Ibn Nuqta, al-Taqyīd li-ma‘rifat ruwāt al-sunan wa al-masānīd, p. 123.
43  See Fuat Sezgin, Geschichte des arabischen Schrifttums, vol. 1, pp. 414–416.
44  Al-Dhahabī, Tadhkirat al-huffāz, vol. 3, p. 25.
45  Ibn al-Nadīm, The Fihrist, p. 560.
46  I thank my colleague Scott Lucas for this number.
47  Ibn al-Salāh, Muqaddimat Ibn al-Salāh, p. 307.
48  Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Karīm al-Rāfi‘ī, al-Tadwīn fī akhbār Qazwīn, vol. 1, pp. 291, 452.
49  Al-Khatīb, Tārīkh Baghdād, vol. 4, pp. 293–294; al-Dhahabī, Mīzān al-i‘tidāl fī naqd al-rijāl, vol. 1, pp. 511–512.
50   Brown, The Canonization of al-Bukhārī and Muslim, pp. 63–64.
51  Al-Rāfi‘ī, al-Tadwīn fī akhbār Qazwīn, vol. 3, p. 131.
52  ‘Abd al-Rahmān b. Sulaymān al-Ahdal, al-Nafas al-yamānī, p. 63.
53  Muhammad b. Khayr al-Ishbīlī, Fahrasat mā rawāhu ‘an shuyūkhihi, pp. 17 ff. See also Zayn al-Dīn al-‘Irāqī, Al-Bā‘ith
‘alā al-khalās min hawādith al-qussās, p. 97.
54  Al-Nawawī, Sharh Sahīh Muslim, vol. 1, p. 119. Abū Tālib al-Makkī, Qūt al-qulūb, vol. 1, p. 137.
55  Al-Suhrawardī, ‘Awārif al-ma‘ārif, vol. 1, pp. 49, 60.
56  Ahmad al-Ghumārī, Al-Burhān al-jalī fī tahqīq intisāb al-sūfiyya ilā ‘Alī, p. 3.
57  Al-Khalīlī, Al-Irshād fī ma‘rifat ‘ulamā’ al-hadīth, p. 6.
58  Al-Khatīb, Jāmi‘ akhlāq al-rāwī wa ādāb al-sāmi‘, vol. 1, p. 205.
59  Al-Tabaranī, Al-Mu‘jam al-saghīr, p. 116.
60 Al-Suyūtī, Jam‘ al-jawāmi‘, vol. 1, pp. 3–4.
61  Stefan Reichmuth, ‘Murtad.ā al-Zabīdī (d. 1791) in Biographical and Autobiographical Accounts,’ p. 75. The famous Sufi of
Cairo, Shams al-Dīn al-Hanafī (d. 847/1443–4), also claimed to have had an isnād of two beings, one person and one jinn,
to the Prophet; al-Sha‘rānī, al-Tabaqāt al-kubrā, p. 438.
62  ‘Abdallāh al-Ghumārī, Tawjīh al-‘ināya, p. 42.
63  Asma Sayeed, ‘Shifting Fortunes: Women and H.adīth Transmission in Islamic History,’ p. 277.
64  Brown, The Canonization of al-Bukhārī and Muslim, pp. 107–108.
65  See Ishaq, India’s Contribution to Hadith Literature.
66  Abū Nu‘aym al-Isbahānī, Dhikr akhbār Isbahān, vol. 1, p. 23.
67  Al-Wāsitī, Tārīkh Wāsit, p. 125.
68  Al-‘Awd, Al-Mu‘īn ‘alā ma‘rifat kutub al-arba‘īn, p. 29.
69  Ibid., pp. 63, 153.
70  Ibid., p. 151.
71  Ibn al-Jawzī, Kitāb al-qussās wa al-mudhakkirīn, p. 146.
72  J. Robson, trans., Miskhat al-Masabih, vol. 1, p. xiii.
73  Al-Baghawī, Masābīh al-sunna, vol. 1, p. 2.
74  Ahmad al-Ghumārī, Al-Mudāwī li-‘ilal al-Jāmi‘ al-saghīr, vol. 1, p.95.
75  Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalānī, Al-Matālib al-‘āliya fī zawā’id al-masānīd al-thamāniya, vol. 1, p. 4.
76  Al-Suyūtī, Nazm al-‘iqyān, p. 50.
77  Muhammad Nāsir al-Dīn al-Albānī, Sahīh al-Jāmi‘ al-saghīr, vol. 1, pp. 42–43; Najm al-Dīn al-Ghazzī, al-Kawākib al-
sā’ira, vol. 1, pp. 228–9.
78  Al-Munāwī, Al-Jāmi‘ al-azhar min hadīth al-nabī al-anwar, vol. 1, p. 3.
79  Al-Kawtharī, Maqālāt, p. 173.
80  ‘Abd al-Rahmān b. Sulaymān al-Ahdal, Al-Nafas al-yamānī, p. 43.

 3
THE METHODS AND HISTORY OF HADITH CRITICISM
INTRODUCTION: REPORTERS THEN AND NOW
Arabic and English textbooks introducing Islamic methods of hadith criticism begin with
presenting the complex technical vocabulary (mustalahāt) of hadith critics as it was
formalized after the thirteenth century. These books assume that by learning this set of terms
students will understand how hadith criticism operated in the early Islamic period when
scholars like al-Bukhārī and Muslim were compiling their Sahīhs. In reality, however, the
critical methods of early Muslim hadith scholars were diametrically opposed to this later, rigid
description. Theirs was an intuitive and commonsense way of trying to determine whether a
report could be reliably attributed to a source or not – a method not unlike those employed by
modern investigative reporters. To set the stage for our study of how Muslims tried to sift
reliable from unreliable ‘reports’ from the Prophet, let us imagine a journalist working for a
newspaper today.
If our reporter tells her editor that she has a major story about a senior political figure, the
editor will ask her two questions: who is your source, and is your source corroborated? How
could our reporter reply? She knows that certain sources are reliable for certain information. If
the president’s spokesperson announces that the president will make a visit to England, there is
no need to double-check this information. Imagine, however, that the reporter has found a
source who gives her rare and valuable information about an important issue but whom she as
yet has no reason to trust. Our reporter is not going to stake her journalistic reputation on this
one tip, but how does she determine the accuracy of her source’s information?
Imagine that this source tells her that there has just been an earthquake in China. Our reporter
would call her contacts in China to confirm. If these contacts tell her that indeed a quake had
occurred, the source has been proven correct. If no one she spoke to had noticed anything, the
source’s story would be uncorroborated and our reporter would conclude that the source was
unreliable. Suppose that next the source tells our reporter valuable information about the
condition of the country’s economy. Again, our reporter proceeds cautiously, so she conducts
thorough research and finds that the source’s information was correct. The source provides tips
on a few more stories, and after checking out the information, our reporter finds that these
stories are true as well. Eventually our reporter concludes that this source is reliable, and if
the source provides a tip on a hot story in the future, the reporter will feel comfortable writing
her story based on the source’s testimony alone.
Reporters understand that the reliability of a source is based upon the accuracy of the
information they provide. The best way to confirm the accuracy of a source is to check with
other sources that have access to the same information and see if they agree. Corroboration ‘is
what turns a tip into a story.’1
These two pillars of modern journalism, the reliability of a source and determining the

 reliability of a source or story through corrobor-ation, are familiar to us all in our daily lives.
We all know people who pass on information reliably and others who tend to forget, lie, or
exaggerate. We all instinctively seek out corroboration and know when it matters and when it
does not. If a student is absent for a day of class in university and hears from a classmate that
the professor has changed the date of the final exam, he or she will not be content to take the
word of just one classmate; the student will ask other students who were also in that class. If
no other students heard the professor make that announcement, he or she will have serious
doubts about the information.
Another fact is equally evident to us in our daily lives: the contents of reports we hear have a
strong influence on our view of their reliability and our confidence in their transmitters. If our
reporter met a source who swore that he had seen a herd of flying elephants downtown, she
would probably both disbelieve him and consider him unreliable from that point on. There are
generally accepted standards of what is possible and impossible. Furthermore, we all have a
sense of what is important information and what is not, and we treat this information
accordingly. If our reporter hears a rumor that the president is about to announce a major
change in the government’s economic policy, she will want to verify this information before
writing her story. If she hears that the president has changed his favorite dessert from ice cream
to angel-food cake, she will probably be content to cite this information as is.
We must remember, however, that such notions of what is possible or impossible, important
or unimportant, are culturally determined, and as such they may differ with time and place. If,
in 1990, a student had come to class holding a small device they claimed contained any piece
of music, information or published material one could think of, the professor would have
called them delusional. Today professors compete daily for attention with such devices. If a
professor in the US claimed to have eaten a great dog meat dinner at a specialized dog meat
restaurant, students would think this was a disgusting joke. But if the professor had just flown
in from China, where dog meat has long been ‘a minor but regular part of the diet’ and where
an annual dog meat festival is held, he might be telling the truth.2
While modern reporters are charged with determining the veracity of stories about what is
happening in the world today on the basis of contemporary sources, the architects of the
Islamic hadith tradition were faced with a more daunting task: they had to establish a system of
distinguishing between true and false stories about a man who had lived over a century earlier
and whose revered status cast a commanding shadow over the entire Islamic tradition.
In this chapter we will discuss the origins, mechanics, and development of Sunni hadith
criticism. We will divide its history into two periods: early hadith criticism, roughly 720–1000
CE, and later hadith criticism, from roughly 1000 CE to today. As in the previous chapter,
notions of ‘authenticity’ and ‘forgery’ mentioned here refer to the judgment of Muslim scholars
of hadith and not necessarily to that of modern Western historians.
THE PROBLEM OF HADITH FORGERY
The Prophet Muhammad is the single most dominant figure in the Islamic religious and legal
tradition. From the time of his emigration to Medina to debates over Islam today, to disobey

 directly his established teachings has been to place oneself outside the Muslim community.
Because the Prophet possessed such eminent authority, early Muslims looked to his legacy to
support or legitimize their different schools of thought, beliefs, or political agendas. It seems
that even during the Prophet’s own lifetime he understood that people could misrepresent him.
In one report, a man claiming to be the Prophet’s representative established himself as the
mayor of a small town in Arabia until the Prophet uncovered his hoax and punished him.3
The first crisis to afflict the Muslim community after the Prophet’s death – the question of
who would succeed him as religious and political leader – revolved around competing claims
about the Prophet’s words. The supporters of ‘Alī b. Abī Tālib argued that the Prophet had
announced him as his successor, while those who affirmed the successive caliphates of Abū
Bakr, ‘Umar, and ‘Uthmān did not. In this and many other Islamic sectarian and political
disagreements, all sides agreed on what the Prophet had said but disagreed on its implications.
Both Sunnis and Shiites, for example, agreed that the Prophet had said that ‘Alī was to him
what Aaron was to Moses, but they disagreed on whether that meant that ‘Alī should succeed
the Prophet politically.
Actually forging reports about the Prophet also quickly became a problem. When civil war
broke out openly between ‘Alī, then the fourth caliph to succeed the Prophet, and the then
governor of Syria and future founder of the Umayyad dynasty, Mu‘āwiya b. Abī Sufyān, both
sides waged a propaganda war using the Prophet’s words as ammunition. ‘Alī’s supporters
falsely claimed that Muhammad had said, ‘If you see Mu‘āwiya ascend my pulpit, then kill
him,’ while Mu‘āwiya’s side countered by forging hadiths such as ‘It is as if Mu‘āwiya were
sent as a prophet because of his forbearance and his having been entrusted with God’s
word’ (Mu‘āwiya had served as one of the Prophet’s scribes).4 There are even reports from the
early historian al-Madā’inī (d. 228/843) that Mu‘āwiya encouraged the systematic forging and
circulation of hadiths affirming the virtues of the other caliphs and Companions at ‘Alī’s
expense.5
In light of how quickly the Prophet’s legacy became a tool to be manipulated by vying parties
among Muslims, we should not be surprised at the veritable slogan of Muslim hadith criticism.
It is the most widely transmitted hadith in all of Islam, with Muslim scholars counting between
sixty and a hundred Companions transmitting it from the Prophet: ‘Whoever mispresents me
intentionally, let him prepare for himself a seat in Hellfire.’
During the lifetime of leading Companions like ‘Umar b. al-Khattāb, ‘Abdallāh b. Mas‘ūd, or
Anas b. Mālik, many of whom had been with the Prophet since his early days in Mecca, it was
difficult to attribute something untrue to the Prophet without a senior Companion noticing. In
fact, there are many reports documenting the Companions’ vigilance against misrepresentations
of the Prophet’s legacy. ‘Alī is quoted as requiring an oath from any Companion who told him a
hadith from the Prophet that he himself had not heard.6 When the Companion Abū Mūsā al-
Ash‘arī told ‘Umar that the Prophet had said that if you knocked on someone’s door three times
and they did not answer you should depart, ‘Umar demanded that he find another Companion to
corroborate the report.7
On a number of occasions after the Prophet’s death, his wife Aisha objected to hadiths that

 other Companions related. She rejected ‘Abdallāh b. ‘Umar’s statement that the Prophet
warned mourners that a dead relative would be punished for his family’s excessive mourning
over him because she believed that it violated the Quranic principle that ‘No bearer of burdens
bears the burdens of another’ (Quran 53:38).8 Sometimes she corrected Companions who had
misunderstood what the Prophet had said. Abū Hurayra quoted the Prophet as saying that
women, beasts and houses could be bad omens. When Aisha heard this she ‘split in half in
anger,’ exclaiming that the Prophet had mentioned this, but only to explain that it was a pre-
Islamic superstition condemned by the Quran.9 Abū Hurayra’s extensive efforts at hadith
collection in particular drew the ire and concern of some leading Companions. There is one
report that ‘Umar b. al-Khattāb told him, ‘Indeed, I say let the Prophet’s words alone or indeed
I’ll send you back to the lands of [your tribe] Daws!’10*
Hadith forgery emerged as a blatant problem when the generation of Muslims who had
known the Prophet well died off. With the death of the last major Companion, Anas b. Mālik,
in Basra in 93/711 (the last Companion to die was Abū al-Tufayl ‘Āmir b. Wāthila, who died
between 100/718 and 110/728) lies about the Prophet quickly multiplied. It is especially in the
generation of the Successors that we begin seeing notebooks (sahīfas) of hadiths, many
supposedly narrated from Anas b. Mālik, filled with forged hadiths of a highly partisan or
controversial nature.11
From that point onward the forgery of hadiths would be a consistent problem in Islamic
civilization. The heyday of hadith forgery was the first four hundred years of Islamic history,
when major hadith collections were still being compiled. As we discussed in the last chapter,
by the late 1100s any hadith that entered circulation that had not already been recorded in some
existing book was automatically deemed a forgery. In the great urban centers of Mamluk Cairo
or Ottoman Istanbul in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, the masses might mistakenly think
that a popular saying such as ‘The Muslim community is sinful but its Lord is most forgiving
(umma mudhniba wa rabb ghafūr)’ was said by the Prophet, but in general hadith forgery had
run its course.12
Political and sectarian conflicts were a major engine for hadith forgery. All the major
political conflicts in classical Islamic history were accompanied by hadiths forged for
propagandistic purposes. The Prophet’s access to knowledge of the future provided endless
possibilities in this realm. In one hadith, the Prophet supposedly tells his uncle ‘Abbās,
progenitor of the Abbasid dynasty, to look at the stars. The Prophet foretells, ‘From your
descendents a number like the number of the Pleiades will rule the Muslim community.’13
In one forged pro-Shiite hadith, the Prophet predicts that ‘al-Husayn will be killed sixty years
after my emigration to Medina,’ referring to the Umayyad caliph’s massacre of the Prophet’s
grandson at Karbala in 61/680.14 We have seen already that even in the twelfth century, an
opponent of the Seljuq Turkish sultan Sanjar forged a hadith in which the Prophet predicted
that, ‘Sanjar will be the last of the non-Arab kings; he will live eighty years and then die
of hunger.’15 In fact, in the early 1990s one Arab scholar claimed that he had found an old
manuscript with a hadith predicting that ‘A leader whose name is derived from the word “tree”
(Bush, perhaps?) will invade and liberate a small hill fort (in Arabic, ‘Kuwait’).’16

 Many hadiths were also forged in legal and theological debates. Here the Sunni/Shiite schism
once again has certainly produced the largest numbers of propagandistic hadiths. Less well-
known conflicts have also yielded countless forgeries. In the first half of the ninth century,
when the Abbasid caliphate was trying to impose its rationalist beliefs on Sunni scholars like
Ibn Hanbal by torturing or imprisoning anyone who would not uphold the belief that the Quran
was God’s created word and not an eternal part of His essence, pro-Sunni hadiths conveniently
appeared in which the Prophet said, ‘Whoever dies believing the Quran is created will meet
God on Judgment Day with his head up his ass.’ In eighth-century debates over whether
Muslims could wear pants as opposed to robes, a hadith appeared in which the Prophet said,
‘O people, take pants as clothing, for indeed they are the most modest of clothes,
especially for your women when they leave the house.’17 As legal schools solidified and
competed with one another, forged hadiths appeared with statements such as ‘There will be in
my community a man named Abū Hanīfa, and he will be its lamp ... and there will be in my
community a man named Muhammad b. Idrīs [al-Shāfi‘ī] whose strife is more harmful
than that of Satan.’ 18
Hadiths were forged to give voice to all sorts of chauvinisms. Some were virulently racist,
such as a forged hadith saying ‘The black African, when he eats his fill he fornicates, and
when he gets hungry he steals (al-zanjī idha shabi‘a zanā wa idhā jā‘a saraqa).’19 Others
voiced civic pride, such as the hadith ‘[The city of] Askalon [near modern-day Gaza] is one
of the two Brides, from there God will resurrect people on the Day of Judgment (‘Asqalān
ihdā al-‘arūsayn ...)’ or a whole Forty Hadith collection that one Ahmad b. Muhammad al-
Marwazī (d. 323/934–5) forged about the virtues of the Iranian city of Qazvin.20
Another major source of forged hadiths was the popular storytellers (qāss, pl. qussās) who
entertained crowds on the streets of metropolises like Baghdad. These storytellers would
attribute Jewish, Christian, or ancient Persian lore to the Prophet. In one fantastic story,
someone named Ishāq b. Bishr al-Kāhilī from Kufa told of the Prophet meeting an old man in
the desert. The man claimed to be named Hāma, the great-grandson of Satan, and to have been
alive since the days of Cain and Abel. In an account resembling a Rolling Stones song, he
proceeds to tell Muhammad how he had met all the great prophets, from Noah to Jacob and
Joseph. Moses had taught him the Torah, and Jesus had told him to convey his greetings to
Muhammad, the messenger to come.21
A surprisingly large number of hadiths were forged and circulated by pious Muslims in an
effort to motivate those around them both religiously and morally. One Abū ‘Isma was asked by
his contemporaries to explain how the hadiths he narrated from ‘Ikrima, the disciple of the
Companion Ibn ‘Abbās, about the virtues of reading different chapters of the Quran, were not
narrated by any of ‘Ikrima’s other students. He replied that he had seen the people becoming
obsessed with the legal scholarship of Abū Hanīfa and the Sīra of Ibn Ishāq. He had forged
these hadiths to try and steer people once again towards the Quran.22
Many of those who forged hadiths for these pious purposes were themselves revered saintly
figures. The famous hadith critic Yahyā b. Sa‘īd al-Qattān (d. 198/813) once said, ‘I have not
witnessed lying [about the Prophet] in anyone more than I have seen it in those known for

 asceticism and piety.’23 A venerated saint of Baghdad, Ghulām Khalīl, was so beloved that on
the day he died in 275/888–9 the markets of the city shut down. Yet when he was questioned
about some dubious hadiths he narrated concerning righteous behavior, Ghulām Khalīl replied,
‘We forged these so that we could soften and improve the hearts of the populace.’24
Certainly pious figures such as Ghulām Khalīl or the scholars of religious law understood the
enormity of the sin of lying about their Prophet. How could they have contradicted their own
mission of preserving his authentic teachings by doing so? Pious figures sometimes replied that
the Prophet had forbidden the Muslims to lie about him, whereas they were lying for him. In the
case of those early jurists who forged legal hadiths to support their school of law, it seems that
they saw no contradiction between their actions and their commitment to preserving the
Prophet’s teachings. After all, as one famous hadith put it, ‘The scholars are the inheritors of
the prophets (al-‘ulamā’ warathat al-anbiyā’).’ It was the scholars who interpreted the
message of Islam as it faced new challenges and circumstances. Phrasing their conclusions
about proper acts or beliefs in the formula of ‘the Prophet said ...’ was simply neatly packaging
their authority as Muhammad’s representatives. As one early jurist explained, ‘When we
arrived at an opinion through reasoning we made it into a hadith.’25 Hadith critics, of course,
found such excuses reprehensible.26
Not all forgery of hadiths was a malicious act. Early transmitters sometimes confused the
opinions or statements of Companions with Prophetic hadiths, such as a rule expounded by
numerous Companions: ‘Ward off capital punishment from the Muslims as much as possible,
and if there is some way out of it then let the person go, for it is better for the judge to err in
mercy than in severity,’ which some casual transmitters attributed to the Prophet. Sometimes
the comments of one of the hadith’s transmitters could be accidentally written as part of the
hadith, a phenomenon that Muslim critics called idrāj (interpolation).
Often the words of scholars or saintly figures or simply popular sayings could be
accidentally elevated to the status of Prophetic hadiths. The saying ‘The love of the earthly life
is the start of every sin (hubb al-dunyā ra’s kull khatī’a)’ was generally attributed to Jesus
until it became confused with a Prophetic hadith.27 A legal principle used by Muslim jurists,
‘Necessities render the forbidden permissible (al-darūriyyāt tubīhu al-mahzūrāt)’ was also
accidentally attributed to Muhammad.28 In the ninth century a hadith appeared saying ‘Beware
of flowers growing in manure, namely a beautiful woman from a bad family (iyyākum wa
khadrā’ al-diman ...).’ In this period another supposed hadith surfaced that ‘Whoever says
something then sneezes, what he says is true (man haddatha hadīthan fa-‘atasa ‘indahu fa-
huwa haqq).’ Neither report had any basis in Prophetic hadiths.29
Forgery of Isnāds
Hadith forgery was not limited to inventing Prophetic sayings or attributing existing maxims to
Muhammad. In light of the importance of the isnād to accessing authority in the Islamic
tradition, isnād for-gery was arguably more common than matn forgery. Equipping existing
hadiths with one’s own isnāds or constructing entirely new chains of transmission was known
as ‘stealing hadiths (sariqat al-hadīth)’ or ‘rigging isnāds (tarkīb al-asānīd).’

  
Figure 3.0 Types of Errors and Forgery in Hadiths
 
Today no one would look askance at someone who cited a hadith without mentioning its
isnād. In the early Islamic period, however, ahl al-hadīth scholars or those who debated them
could not cite a hadith without providing their own isnād for the report. A scholar who had
heard about a hadith without a firm isnād or from a transmitter considered unreliable by the ahl
al-hadīth critics could thus not credibly present his hadith in any discussion. Forging a new
isnād offered a solution. ‘Amr b. ‘Ubayd (d. 144/761), who belonged to the Muslim rationalist
camp known as the Mu‘tazilites, whom the ahl al-hadīth considered their mortal enemies, was
thus attacked for lying in his narration of the hadith ‘He who carries weapons against us
[Muslims] is not one of us (man hamala ‘alaynā al-silāh fa-laysa minnā)’ from his teacher
al-Hasan al-Basrī, from the Prophet. This hadith was well known as authentic among the ahl
al-hadīth. The problem was that al-Hasan had not actually transmitted this from the Prophet.
‘Amr b. ‘Ubayd had heard of the report somewhere else and then tried to use it to support the
Mu‘tazilite position that committing grave sins assured Muslims a place in hell. But he did not
have his own isnād for it. So he manufactured one from his teacher al-Hasan so that he could
use it in debates.30
The second major motivation to forge an isnād for an existing hadith was to bolster its
reliability by increasing evidence of its transmission. According to the great hadith critic of
Baghdad, al-Dāraqutnī (d. 385/995), a whole notebook of hadiths praising human reason (‘aql)
was forged by Maysara b. ‘Abd Rabbihi. This book was then taken by Dāwūd al-Muhabbir,
who equipped the reports with his own new isnāds. One ‘Abd al-‘Azīz b. Abī Rajā’ then stole

 these hadiths and provided them a new set of isnāds. Sulaymān b. ‘Īsā al-Sinjarī then did the
same. A person who came across the hadiths in this book therefore could find four different
sets of isnāds leading to four different scholars for hadiths that were in fact total forgeries.31
Especially in the tenth century and afterwards, when rare and elevated isnāds assumed a
particular value among hadith collectors, disingenuous scholars could forge isnāds with these
characteristics. We already saw the hadith that al-Tabarānī (d. 360/971) narrated via the
impossibly short isnād of three people to the Prophet: Ja‘far b. Hamīd al-Ansārī 
 ‘Umar b.
Abān 
 Anas b. Mālik 
 the Prophet. The fact that al-Tabarānī was the only hadith scholar to
narrate from the transmitter Ja‘far b. Hamīd strongly suggests that this Ja‘far might have been a
purveyor of forged elevated isnāds, which a collector like al-Tabarānī would have found
irresistible.
THE DEVELOPMENT OF EARLY SUNNI HADITH CRITICISM – THE THREE-TIERED METHOD
As false attributions to the Prophet multiplied in the late seventh century, how were those
Muslims who sought to preserve Muhammad’s authentic legacy to distinguish between true and
forged hadiths? While the ahl al-ra’y scholars in Iraqi cities like Kufa attempted to rise above
the flood of forged hadiths by depending on the Quran, well-established hadiths, and their own
legal reasoning, the school that would give birth to the Sunni tradition, the ahl al-hadīth,
evolved the three-tiered approach to determining the authenticity of a hadith. The first tier was
demanding a source (isnād) for the report, the second evaluating the reliability of that source,
and the third seeking corroboration for the hadith.
The processes of this three-tiered critical method did not emerge fully until the mid eighth
century with critics like Mālik b. Anas and Shu‘ba b. al-Hajjāj. Certainly, Successors like al-
Zuhrī and even Companions had examined critically material they heard attributed to the
Prophet. Moreover, the critical opinions of Successors would inform later hadith critics. A
formalized system of requiring isnāds and investigating them according to agreed conventions
and through a set of technical terms, however, did not appear until the time of Mālik.
STEP ONE: THE ISNĀD
The isnād, or ‘support,’ was the essential building-block of the hadith critical method. So
essential would the isnād be to the Sunni science of hadith criticism that it became the
veritable symbol of the ‘cult of authenticity’ that is Sunni Islam. One of the most oft-repeated
slogans among hadith critics comes from the famous scholar Ibn al-Mubārak (d. 181/797), who
said, ‘The isnād is part of religion, if not for the isnād, whoever wanted could say whatever
they wanted. But if you ask them, “Who told you this?” they cannot reply.’ The great jurist al-
Shāfi‘ī provided a similarly famous declaration, ‘The person who seeks knowledge without an
isnād, not asking “where is this from?” indeed, he is like a person gathering wood at night. He
carries on his back a bundle of wood when there may be a viper in it that could bite him.’
Sunnis thus understood the isnād as the prime means of defending the true teachings of the
Prophet against heretics as well as protection from subtle deviations that might slip into

 Muslims’ beliefs and practice.32
 
Figure 3.1 Generations of Sunni Hadith Critics
 
The origins of the isnād were as commonsense as its function, beginning with the rise of
hadith forgery. As the Successor Muhammad b. Sīrīn (d. 110/729), a leading student of the
Companion Anas b. Mālik, explained:
 
In the early period no one would ask about the isnād. But when the Strife [most probably the Second Civil War, 680–
692CE] began they would say ‘Name for us your sources’ so that the People of the Sunna (ahl al-sunna) could be looked
at and their hadiths accepted, and the People of Heresy (ahl al-bid‘a) could be looked at and their hadiths ignored.33
 

 In the milieu of the early Islamic period, simply demanding an isnād for reports attributed to
the Prophet was an excellent first line of defense against inauthentic material entering Muslim
discourse. We can imagine the newly Muslim inhabitants of Kufa, still clinging to Christian or
Zoroastrian lore, or even Bedouins eager to insinuate tribal Arab values into Islam, ascribing a
saying to the Prophet as evidence for their ideas. If they provided no isnād at all, the reports
would not enter the musnad collections of scholars like Abū Dāwūd al-Tayālisī. The formative
critic Shu‘ba b. al-Hajjāj (d. 160/776) is quoted as saying, ‘All religious knowledge (‘ilm)
which does not feature “he narrated to me” or “he reported to me”[the components of the
isnād] is vinegar and sprouts.’34
STEP TWO: RATING TRANSMITTERS AND ESTABLISHING CONTIGUOUS TRANSMISSION
On their own, however, isnāds could not deter a determined forger. As we saw with the
hadiths on human reason, an isnād could be made up or inauthentic material simply equipped
with one and then circulated. Moreover, merely requiring someone to provide a source for a
hadith they cited did not tell you if that source was reliable. The second tier of criticism thus
involved identifying the individuals who constituted isnāds, evaluating their reliability, and
then determining if there were any risks that someone unreliable might also have played some
part in transmitting the report.
1) Transmitter Evaluation
A hadith transmitter was evaluated according to two criteria. First, his or her character, correct
belief, and level of piety were scrutinized in order to determine if he or she was ‘upright
(‘adl).’ Second, and much more importantly, the transmitter’s corpus of reports and narration
practices were evaluated to decide if he or she was ‘accurate (dābit).’
Hadith transmitter criticism (known as al-jarh wa al-ta‘dīl, ‘impugning and approving’) and
isnād evaluation began in full with the first generation of renowned hadith critics, that of
Shu‘ba b. al-Hajjāj, Mālik b. Anas, Sufyān al-Thawrī, al-Layth b. Sa‘d, and Sufyān b. ‘Uyayna,
who flourished in the mid to late eighth century in the cities of Basra, Kufa, Fustat (modern-day
Cairo), Mecca, and Medina (see Figure 3.1). These scholars began the process of collecting
people’s hadith narrations and examining both their bodies of material and their characters to
determine if the material they purveyed could be trusted. Mālik is the first scholar known to
have used technical terms such as ‘thiqa (reliable)’ to describe these narrators, while Shu‘ba’s
evaluations did not utilize any specialized vocabulary.35
The evaluations of this first great generation were studied and added to by their students,
especially the two great Basran critics ‘Abd al-Rahmān b. Mahdī (d. 198/814) and Yahyā b.
Sa‘īd al-Qattān (d. 198/813). The later analyst Shams al-Dīn al-Dhahabī notes that ‘whoever
they both criticize, by God, rarely do you find that criticism refuted [by others], and whoever
they both agree on as trustworthy, he is accepted as proof.’36 The critical methods and opinions
of Ibn Mahdī and al-Qattān passed on to their three most respected students, who can be seen
as the beginning of the heyday of Sunni hadith criticism: Ibn Hanbal (d. 241/855) and his friend
Yahyā b. Ma‘īn (d. 233/848) in Baghdad and ‘Alī b. al-Madīnī in Basra (d. 234/849). Their

 students refined hadith criticism into its most exact and lasting form: the ‘Two Shaykhs’ al-
Bukhārī and Muslim, the two senior critics of Rayy (modern Tehran), Abū Zur‘a al-Rāzī (d.
264/878) and his friend Abū Hātim al-Rāzī (d. 277/890), as well as influential younger critics
of that generation such as al-Nasā’ī (d. 303/916).
The 900s saw several generations of critics who reviewed and reassessed the judgments of
these earlier scholars and also continued to evaluate those involved in the ongoing
transmission of hadiths: Ibn Abī Hātim al-Rāzī (d. 327/938), Ibn ‘Adī (d. 365/975–6), Ibn
Hibbān al-Bustī (d. 354/965), Abū al-Hasan al-Dāraqutnī (d. 385/995), and al-Hākim al-
Naysābūrī (d. 405/1014).
Although the apex and most active period of hadith transmitter criticism is usually considered
to be the eighth to tenth centuries, subsequent generations of critics contributed to this science
as well. Hadiths were still transmitted with full isnāds into the early 1200s, so it was possible
until that time for previously unrated hadiths to be in circulation among transmitters. Master
hadith scholars like al-Khatīb al-Baghdādī (d. 463/1071) and Ibn ‘Asākir (d. 571/1176)
therefore continued to rate transmitters living in their times. Furthermore, they synthesized,
reconciled, and reexamined existing opinions on earlier transmitters.
This reconsideration of earlier transmitters’ standing has, in fact, never really ended. If we
look at al-Dhahabī’s list of the expert critics whose opinions should be heeded, we find that it
continues until al-Dhahabī’s own time in the 1300s. One of the most commanding critics in the
Sunni hadith tradition, ‘the Hadith Master (al-hāfiz)’ Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalānī, died in
852/1449. Hadith transmitter criticism has continued until the modern day. This is possible
because, as we shall see, determining if someone was reliable or not had little to do with any
personal experience with their character, its flaws, or fine qualities. Ultimately, it was the
analysis of the body of their transmissions for corroboration that determined their accuracy
(dabt) and thus their station.
How would a hadith critic such as Shu‘ba, al-Bukhārī, or Ibn ‘Adī actually evaluate a
transmitter? First, it was essential to know who this transmitter was. If one was presented with
a hadith transmitted from ‘someone,’ ‘Ahmad,’ or ‘a group of people in Medina,’ how could
one evaluate the strength of its isnād? By the mid 800s it had become accepted convention
among hadith critics that a person needed two well-known transmitters to identify him
sufficiently, prove that he existed and narrate hadiths from him in order to qualify for rating.
Otherwise, the transmitter would be dismissed as ‘unknown (majhūl)’ and the report
automatically considered unreliable.
Second, the critic would collect all the reports that the transmitter had narrated from various
teachers and then analyze them for corroboration, a process known as ‘consideration (i‘tibār).’
As mentioned last chapter, musnads would be very useful for this task, but ultimately a critic
would have to rely on a robust memory in order to recall all the different isnāds in which the
transmitter in question played some part. For every hadith that the transmitter narrated from a
certain teacher, the critic asks ‘Did this teacher’s other students narrate this report too?’ If the
critic finds that, for all the teachers that the transmitter narrates from, his fellow students
corroborated him for a very high percentage of his hadiths, then he is considered to be reliable

 in his transmissions. When asked what kind of transmitters should be abandoned as unreliable,
Shu‘ba explained:
 
Someone who narrates excessively from well-known transmitters what these well-known transmitters do not recognize, his
hadiths are cast aside. And if he makes a lot of mistakes, his hadiths are cast aside. And if he is accused of forgery
(kadhib), his hadiths are cast aside. And if he narrates a hadith that is agreed upon as an error, and he does not hold
himself accountable for that and reject the report, his hadiths are cast aside.37
 
Muslim b. al-Hajjāj describes the telltale signs of a weak hadith transmitter as someone who,
‘when his narrations are compared with those of people known for preservation [of hadith] and
uprightness of character, his narrations do not concur with their narrations, or do so only
rarely. If the majority of his hadiths are like that then he is rejected and not used in hadith.’38
Early hadith critics understood very well that no one transmitter was immune from error.
Below the level of master transmitters, Ibn Mahdī described a lesser type of narrator ‘who
makes errors but most of his hadiths are sahīh. This kind of person’s hadiths should not be
abandoned, for if they were, all the people’s hadiths would disappear.’39
Finally, the critic would examine the transmitter’s character, religious beliefs, and piety in
order to determine his ‘uprightness (‘adāla).’ Although later legal theorists would establish
very formal requirements for someone to be declared ‘upright,’ such as the requirement widely
accepted by Sunnis after the 1200s that the transmitter be ‘Muslim, of age, of sound mind, free
of sinful behavior and defects in honor,’ early hadith critics were actually very flexible with
determining uprightness.
This is most evident in the issue of transmitters who espoused beliefs that Sunnis considered
heretical, such as Shiism, belonging to the Kharijite sect, or a belief in free will (qadar).
Although al-Shāfi‘ī had declared that one could accept hadiths from transmitters regardless of
their sectarian affiliations as long as they did not belong to certain Shiite sects that allowed
lying, by the mid 900s scholars like Ibn Hibbān had declared a consensus among Sunni hadith
critics that one could accept hadiths from any heretical transmitter provided he was not an
extremist and did not actively try to convert others to his beliefs. In theory, this meant that one
could accept hadiths from Shiite transmitters as long as they did not engage in virulently anti-
Sunni practices such as cursing Abū Bakr or ‘Umar or transmit hadiths that seemed to preach
the Shiite message.
In truth, however, early hadith critics did not follow these strictures. As the eighteenth-
century Yemeni hadith analyst Ibn al-Amīr al-San‘ānī (d. 1768) observed, later theorists had
set up principles that did not apply to the realities of early hadith criticism. Al-Bukhārī, the
most revered of all hadith critics, narrated two hadiths in his famous Sahīh through the
Kharijite ‘Imrān b. Hittān, who was so extreme in his beliefs that he wrote a poem praising the
Kharijite who murdered the fourth caliph ‘Alī. In his Sahīh, Muslim narrated the hadith that
‘Only a believer loves ‘Alī, and only a hypocrite hates him’ through the known Shiite
transmitter ‘Adī b. Thābit. As we can see, the two uncontested masters of Sunni hadith
criticism could narrate hadiths that they considered authentic through extremists and heretics
who proselytized for their cause!

 The explanation for this lies in the priorities of the early hadith critics. Simply put, if a
transmitter consistently and accurately passed on hadiths he had heard from the previous
generation, hadith critics had little interest in his beliefs or practice. Ibn Ma‘īn described the
Shiite transmitter ‘Abd al-Rahmān b. Sālih as ‘trustworthy, sincere, and Shiite, but who would
rather fall from the sky than misrepresent half a word.’40 One major early hadith transmitter,
Ismā‘īl b. ‘Ulayya (d. 193/809), became so shamefully intoxicated on one occasion that he had
to be carried home on a donkey. Yet he was a reliable transmitter, so his hadiths were
accepted.41 Although later theorists of the hadith tradition would talk of the two pillars of
reliability as ‘uprightness (‘adāla) and accuracy (dabt),’ al-San‘ānī rightly pointed out that one
should reorder them ‘accuracy and uprightness,’ since the former greatly outweighed the
latter.42
Ultimately, Sunnis could not escape their dependency on the role of ‘non-Sunnis’ in hadith
transmission. The early critic Ibn Sa‘d (d. 230/845) notes how one Khālid al-Qatwānī was a
staunch Shiite but that hadith scholars ‘wrote down his hadiths out of necessity.’43 Without such
‘heretics,’ critics knew that few hadiths would ever have been transmitted.
Guaranteeing the transmitter’s ‘uprightness (‘adāla),’ however, did have an important
function. Regardless of a transmitter’s accur-acy, if they were known to have intentionally
misrepresented the Prophet or forged a hadith then they could not be trusted. Sulaymān b.
Dāwūd al-Shādhakūnī (d. 234/848–9), for example, was considered to have the most
prodigious memory of hadiths in his time and one of the biggest hadith corpora. Yet he was
known to have lied about hadiths and altered them to fit certain situations, so he was excluded
from transmission. Al-Shādhakūnī was so untrustworthy that when he awed a gathering by
claiming that he knew a hadith from Rayy that Abū Zur‘a al-Rāzī did not know, people
believed that he had just made it up on the spot to impress them.44
Although in the eighth and ninth centuries each hadith critic used slightly different and
sometimes shifting terms to describe a transmitter’s level of reliability, by the early tenth
century a conventional jargon had emerged. Ibn Abī Hātim al-Rāzī (d. 327/938) lists the levels
as:
 
1. ‘Reliable’ (Thiqa, mutqin, thabt) 
 transmitter’s hadiths can be used as proof in legal
scholarship with no hesitation
2. ‘Sincere’ (sadūq, lā ba’s bihi) 
 transmitter’s hadiths are recorded and can be taken as
proof if bolstered or corroborated
3. ‘Venerable’ (shaykh)
4. ‘Righteous’ (sālih)
transmitter’s hadiths are
5. ‘Lenient on hadith’ (layyin al-hadīth)
used for identifying
6. ‘Not strong’ (laysa bi-qawī)
corroboration depending
7. ‘Weak’ (da‘īf)
on strength
8. ‘Liar, abandoned’ (matrūk al-hadīth, dhāhib al-hadīth, kadhdhāb) 
 the transmitter’s
hadiths are not used at all.45
Books of transmitter criticism

 Hadith transmitter criticism often took place in discussion sessions among critics or with their
students, but its results were set down by master critics in dictionaries of transmitter
evaluation (kutub al-rijāl). Early works include the Tabaqāt al-kubrā (The Great Book of
Generations) of Ibn Sa‘d (d. 230/845), the Ahwāl al-rijāl (Conditions of the Transmitters) of
al-Jūzajānī (d. 259/873), the massive ‘Great History (al-Tārīkh al-kabīr)’ of al-Bukhārī, and
the Jarh wa al-ta‘dīl of Ibn Abī Hātim al-Rāzī. Some books focused specifically on
discussing transmitters whom the author felt were reliable; these included al-‘Ijlī’s (d.
261/875) Tārīkh al-thiqāt and Ibn Hibbān’s Kitāb al-thiqāt. Voluminous books were devoted
to listing and discussing weak transmitters as well. The most important are the Kitāb al-
du‘afā’ al-kabīr of al-Bukhārī (now lost), the Kāmil fī du‘afā’ al-rijāl of Ibn ‘Adī and Ibn
Hibbān’s Kitāb al-majrūhīn. Such works presented critics’ opinions of a transmitter along
with a selection of the unacceptable narrations that they transmitted. Because they consistently
evaluated the reliability of personalities they mention, local histories like al-Khatīb’s History
of Baghdad are also works of transmitter criticism.
In the period of consolidation and analysis from the 1300s to the 1600s, later critics
amalgamated and digested these earlier works of hadith criticism. ‘Abd al-Ghanī al-Maqdisī
(d. 600/1203) wrote his al-Kamāl fī ma‘rifat asmā’ al-rijāl (The Perfection in Knowing the
Names of Transmitters), presenting earlier descriptions and evaluations of all the transmitters
in the Six Books. Jamāl al-Dīn al-Mizzī (d. 742/1341) added to this work and further analyzed
the ratings of the transmitters within the Six Books in his Tahdhīb al-kamāl (The Refinement of
Perfection), published today in thirty-five volumes. Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalānī produced an
abridgement of this work with his own comments entitled Tahdhīb al-tahdhīb (The Refinement
of the Refinement). Scholars like the Egyptian Ibn al-Mulaqqin (d. 804/1401) added the
transmitters found in other hadith collections such as the Musnads of Ibn Hanbal and al-Shāfi‘ī
as well as the Sahīh of Ibn Khuzayma and the Mustadrak of al-Hākim to expanded versions of
al-Mizzī’s book. The Hanafī scholar of Cairo, Badr al-Dīn al-‘Aynī (d. 855/1451), devoted a
rijāl work to the transmitters in al-Tahāwī’s collections.
Other later analysts focused on the subject of weak transmitters. Shams al-Dīn al-Dhahabī
wrote his masterful Mīzān al-i‘tidāl fī naqd al-rijāl (The Fair Scale for Criticizing
Transmitters), collecting all the information on any transmitter impugned by earlier figures. Ibn
Hajar added his own comments in a revision of this work, Lisān al-mīzān (The Pointer of the
Scale).
As we saw in the last chapter, the isnāds to hadith books could affect the reliability of hadiths
in them, especially during the ninth and tenth centuries. Scholars like Ibn Nuqta of Baghdad (d.
629/1231) therefore wrote books of transmitter criticism addressing the people who conveyed
books from their authors. Ibn Nuqta’s al-Taqyīd fī ma‘rifat ruwāt al-sunan wa al-masānīd and
Abū ‘Alā’ al-Fāsī’s (d. 1770) addendum to that book are examples of this genre.
Reconciling disagreements among critics
With the plethora of transmitter critics from the eighth century on, how was a later critic or
analyst supposed to know whose opinion to take on the reliability of a narrator or a hadith? Ibn

 Ishāq (d. 150/767), for example, the author of the famous biography of the Prophet, was a very
controversial figure. Mālik, Ibn al-Qattān, Ibn Hanbal, and others considered him highly
unreliable because he accepted hadiths from questionable narrators as well as Christians and
Jews. But Shu‘ba felt he was impeccably reliable, ‘Alī b. al-Madīnī named him one of the
pivots of hadith transmission in his age, and all the Six Books except Sahīh al-Bukhārī relied
on him as a narrator. Certainly, this created a great potential for disagreement over the
reliability of transmitters and, hence, of hadiths themselves.
To a certain extent, such disagreement was the inevitable result of the complicated careers of
transmitters and the contrasting critical thresholds of the many individual analysts examining
them and their reports. One critic could change his mind about a transmitter, as al-Bukhārī did
when he reduced Muhammad b. Humayd al-Rāzī’s rating from ‘good’ to ‘weak.’ As the hadith
scholar al-Ismā‘īlī (d. 371/981) noted, critics often rated transmitters in relation to certain of
their teachers. So a critic might describe a transmitter positively in one place and negatively in
another.46
In general, however, later analysts erred on the side of caution and operated on the principle
that ‘criticism supersedes approval provided that the reason for the criticism is provided.’
There were limits to this, however. Scholars who had personal vendettas against one another –
Mālik’s criticism of Ibn Ishāq was the result of a well-documented personal feud between them
– were not accepted as fair critics of one another.
Later analysts were often aware of such issues and took earlier critics’ idiosyncrasies and
personal leanings into consideration. Al-Jūzajānī was known to have a vehement dislike for
Shiism, so any rejection by him of a transmitter as ‘a heretical Shiite’ was probably an
overstatement. If he approved of a transmitter, however, it meant that he was certainly free of
any Shiite tendencies. Abū Hātim al-Rāzī was well known as a very stringent critic – even the
seminal legal and hadith scholar al-Shāfi‘ī had only merited a ‘sincere (sadūq)’ rating with
him. Ibn Ma‘īn was very harsh – once calling a narrator who criticized a Companion a ‘sucker
of his mother’s clitoris’ – so his approval carried great weight.47 Ibn ‘Adī was generally very
objective. He would limit his evaluations to strict examinations of transmitters’ hadiths for
corroboration or its absence. As a result, he would often overturn the disapproval of an earlier
critic with a comment such as ‘I have not found uncorroborated reports among his hadiths.’
The standing of the Companions
The Companions of the Prophet achieved a unique place in the worldview of Sunni hadith
critics. Although some early historians and transmitters like al-Wāqidī (d. 207/822–3) only
considered those who reached adulthood during the lifetime of the Prophet to be Companions,
the definition that became accepted by Sunnis was much less strict.48 As al-Bukhārī notes in his
Sahīh, a Companion is anyone who saw the Prophet, even for a moment, while a believer and
who then died as a Muslim.49
This had tremendous consequences for hadith transmission, for by 900 CE Sunnis considered
that all the Companions of the Prophet were automatically ‘upright (‘adl).’ This belief was
based on Quranic verses such as ‘You are the best community brought out for humanity

 (kuntum khayr umma ukhrijat li’l-nās)’ (Quran 3:110) and Prophetic hadiths such as ‘The
best of generations is the one in which I was sent, then that which follows, then that which
follows.’ In effect, then, the first generation of hadith transmitters was beyond criticism. In fact,
the famous ninth-century hadith critic Abū Zur‘a al-Rāzī stated that anyone who criticized a
Companion was a heretic.50
Later analysts would refine this understanding of the Companions’ uprightness. As Ibn
Taymiyya (d. 728/1328) explained, the Companions were not perfect – Mughīra b. Shu‘ba had
lied, and Walīd b. ‘Uqba was a known drunkard. But none had ever lied about the Prophet.51
Many Sunni scholars have thus understood uprightness as meaning that the Companions’
exposure to the tremendous spirit-ual charisma of Muhammad prohibited them from lying about
the Prophet but not other sins.52
It is no surprise, then, that Sunni hadith scholars strove to identify who was a Companion.
‘Alī b. al-Madīnī (d. 234/838) wrote an early work (now lost) listing them, to be followed by
Ibn Qāni‘ (d. 351/962), Abū Nu‘aym al-Isbahānī, and others. Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalānī’s Isāba fī
ma‘rifat al-sahāba is the most widely cited biographical dictionary of the Companions. There
was great disagreement over the actual number of Companions: al-Shāfi‘ī estimated their
number at sixty thousand, Abū Zur‘a al-Rāzī at over a hundred thousand. In his biographical
dictionary of Companions, Ibn Hajar listed approximately twelve thousand three hundred. On a
practical level, the Companions who actually played a noticeable role in hadith transmission
were many fewer: the Six Books include hadiths from only 962 Companions.53
The Sunni critics’ view of the Companions was both ideologically driven and practical.
Sunni Islam was built on the idea that the Companions of the Prophet had inherited his authority
and passed on his teachings reliably. In that sense, as a group they were above reproach. In
terms of hadith criticism, however, the critics’ reach did not extend far enough back to apply
the rules of transmitter criticism to the Companions. The earliest critic, al-Zuhrī, had met only
the youngest of the Companions, and his hadith criticism mostly addressed the reports he heard
from other Successors. Al-Zuhrī, Mālik, and Shu‘ba had direct experience with the Successors,
but they had no real way to evaluate the uprightness or accuracy of Companions. In a sense,
reports such as Aisha’s aforementioned rejection of hadiths for content reasons represent
vestiges of hadith criticism from the Companion generation. That the collective impunity of the
Companions was a later construct of the Sunni worldview is evident when one finds
occasional minor Companions listed in early books of weak hadith transmitters.54
The chicken and the egg – Who made the early experts experts?
As you might have noticed, the names of the early generations of master hadith critics (Figure
3.1) overlap to a large extent with Figure 2.1 on major hadith transmitters. So did just
transmitting a vast number of hadiths make a person a reliable hadith transmitter or an expert
critic? The answer seems to be no – just because one was a major transmitter did not mean that
one was reliable. Ibn Ishāq was an essential pivot of hadith transmission in Medina, but it
became clear to many critics even in his own lifetime that he was not at all discriminating in
what he transmitted. Mālik, on the other hand, only transmitted from two people (‘Abd al-

 Karīm b. Abī al-Mukhāriq and ‘Atā’ al-Khurāsānī) that he (and later critics) did not feel were
reliable (thiqa). Later critics also distinguished between an early critic/transmitter’s own
transmissions and his evaluations of others. Al-Zuhrī’s opinions carried great influence, but
later critics all agreed that his mursal hadiths (see below for a discussion of this term) were
too unreliable to use. The great critic Sufyān al-Thawrī regularly narrated hadiths that others
considered unreliable, whereas when Shu‘ba transmitted a hadith it was understood that he
believed it was authentic.
In a similar vein, in the formative period of Sunni Islam in the ninth century, did hadith
scholars such as Ibn Hanbal decide which early transmitters to accept based on their Sunni
beliefs? Was Sunni hadith criticism just a tool for excluding non-Sunnis? The answers to these
questions are certainly ‘no,’ since, as we have seen, Sunni critics regularly accepted the
hadiths of people whose beliefs they considered anathema. Beyond merely accepting non-
Sunnis as transmitters of hadiths, Sunnis even accepted one as a hadith critic. Despite his
fervent Shiism, Ibn ‘Uqda (d. 332/944) was listed by staunch Sunnis like al-Dhahabī as ‘the
oceanic hadith scholar,’ whose criticisms of transmitters and narrations carried great weight.55
2) Contiguity of transmission (al-ittisāl)
Evaluating the sources of a hadith was of little use, however, if a critic could not be sure who
these sources were. If one transmitter had never actually met the person from whom they
quoted the hadith or if it was known that he had not heard that hadith from his teacher, then who
was the intermediary? With no way to guarantee that intermediary’s reliability, there were
endless possibilities for what sort of deviation or forgery could have occurred. Establishing
that a hadith had been transmitted by a contiguous, unbroken isnād from the Prophet was thus as
crucial as transmitter reliability for determining the authenticity of a hadith. If it could not be
established that the people in the isnād had heard from one another, then hadith critics
considered the chain of transmission broken (munqati‘) and thus unreliable.
In order to determine if an isnād was ‘contiguous (muttasil),’ hadith critics attempted to
identify all the people from whom a narrator had heard hadiths. If a transmitter was not a
known liar, then one could infer this from his saying ‘So-and-so narrated to me (haddathanī),’
‘so-and-so reported to us (akhbaranā),’ or ‘I heard from so-and-so (sami‘tu min ...).’ Other
phrases for transmission did not necessarily indicate direct transmission. ‘According to (‘an)’
could mean that someone had heard a hadith directly from the person in question or not. In
addition to looking at this terminology, a critic would compare the death date of the teacher
with the age of the student and investigate the possibility that they were in the same place at the
same time.
Because establishing contiguous transmission was so important, by the mid 700s transmitters
had become very serious about specifying exactly how hadith transmission occurred. The most
accurate forms of direct transmission were either reading a teacher’s hadiths back to him (often
indicated by the phrase ‘he reported to us, akhbaranā’) or listening to the teacher read his
hadiths (often indicated by ‘he narrated to us, haddathanā’). If a teacher gave a student his
books of hadiths to copy, this was termed ‘handing over (munāwala).’ We have already

 discussed ‘permission to transmit (ijāza)’ in the last chapter. Although there was debate over
whether reading hadiths to a teacher or hearing them read was more accurate, all scholars
acknowledged that ‘handing over’ and ‘permission to transmit’ were the most tenuous forms of
transmission. Reading a book with no transmission from the teacher at all (‘finding, wijāda’)
inspired no confidence at all.
Transmitters fretted over these forms of narration and often debated the proper terminology.
The Hanafī al-Tahāwī (d. 321/933) wrote a short treatise on how the technical terms
‘akhbaranā’ and ‘haddathanā’ actually meant the same thing (also the opinion of the majority
of scholars). When al-Awzā‘ī gave a book of hadiths to a student in an act of ‘handing over,’
the student asked, ‘About this book, do I say “haddathanī”?’ Al-Awzā‘ī replied, ‘If I narrated
it directly to you, then say that.’ The student inquired, ‘So do I say “akhbaranī”?’ Al-Awzā‘ī
replied that no, he should say ‘al-Awzā‘ī said’ or ‘according to al-Awzā‘ī.’56
Not all critics agreed on the requirements for a contiguous isnād. There was disagreement
over whether the phrase ‘according to (‘an)’ should be interpreted as an indication of direct
transmission or not. Muslim b. al-Hajjāj claimed that the great hadith critics had all accepted
‘an as indicating direct transmission provided that the two people involved were
contemporaries and that it was likely that they had met one another. Others, like Ibn ‘Abd al-
Barr (d. 463/1070) and al-Khatīb al-Baghdādī, claimed that hadith critics had agreed that one
needed proof that the two transmitters had actually met at least once.
Obfuscation in Transmission (Tadlīs)
Critics of the eighth, ninth, and early tenth centuries often attempted to be more exact than just
establishing if two transmitters had met. They sought to determine exactly which hadiths certain
transmitters had heard from their teachers. Shu‘ba thus studied the hadiths of his teacher
Qatāda until he found that he had only heard three from his teacher Abū al-‘Āliya.57 This was
especially important in the case of tadlīs, or obfuscation in transmission. Tadlīs occurred when
a transmitter cited an isnād in an ambiguous manner, such as saying ‘so-and-so said,’ implying
that he had heard the hadith directly from the person when in fact he was omitting his
immediate source for the hadith. Transmitters might hide their immediate source because he or
she was considered unreliable or espoused beliefs unacceptable in Sunni Islam. Tadlīs did not
always occur for insidious reasons. If a student had to leave a dictation session to answer
nature’s call, for example, he would hear the hadiths that he had missed from a classmate.
When narrating those hadiths, however, he might leave out the classmate’s name and simply say
‘Teacher so-and-so said.’ Because tadlīs was often innocuous, very few transmitters were
totally innocent of it. Only Shu‘ba b. al-Hajjāj was known to never lapse into it.
Identifying tadlīs was a primary concern of critics in the eighth century and beyond. By
interrogating a transmitter a critic could determine whom he omitted from isnāds in instances
of tadlīs. Transmitters like Sufyān b. ‘Uyayna, who only omitted the names of reliable figures,
could be trusted even when doing tadlīs. Others who often omitted the names of weak
narrators, like Ibn Ishāq, could not be relied upon unless they specified direct transmission.58
Al-Khatīb al-Baghdādī and Ibn Hajar both wrote books discussing tadlīs and those accused of

 it.
Mursal Hadiths
Similar to tadlīs was the phenomenon of mursal hadiths, or instances in which someone quoted
the Prophet without ever having met him. If a Successor or an early scholar like Mālik said
‘the Prophet said,’ this was clearly an incomplete isnād since Mālik never met the Prophet.
Mursal hadiths occurred because, especially in the first few generations of Muslims, scholars
were not obsessive about providing detailed isnāds for every report all the time. Al-Zuhrī,
Mālik, or Abū Hanīfa might quote the Prophet while discussing a legal issue informally
without bothering to provide an isnād.
When such mursal hadiths were recorded in musannaf works like the Muwatta’ or the legal
responses of Abū Hanīfa, however, they presented a problem for later hadith critics. How
should they be treated? Because mursal hadiths had incomplete isnāds and one could not be
sure from whom a Successor was narrating, mursals were almost always considered
unreliable by hadith critics. After extensive research on the mursal reports of certain early
transmitters, however, and attempts to find counterparts to them with full isnāds, critics
approved of certain transmitters’ mursal hadiths. Al-Shāfi‘ī concluded that the mursals of the
Successor Sa‘īd b. al-Musayyab (d. 94/713) were reliable because the source he omitted, his
father-in-law Abū Hurayra, was the most knowledgeable Companion about hadiths. Critics
debated the reliability of al-Hasan al-Basrī’s mursal hadiths – his contemporary Ibn Sīrīn said
that al-Hasan was totally uncritical about his hadith sources, so his mursals were useless.
Yahyā al-Qattān said that he had studied all of al-Hasan’s mursals and found versions with full
isnāds for all but two of them.59 Ibn Abī Hātim al-Rāzī composed a whole book entitled Kitāb
al-marāsīl (The Book of Mursals) in an attempt to determine which Successors had heard
hadiths from which Companions.
STEP THREE: FINDING CORROBORATION FOR THE HADITH
Corroboration had played a central role in determining the reliability of a transmitter – if he
narrated hadiths that other students of his source did not, then his reliability was questioned.
But a forger could still simply take an isnād of a respected transmitter and attach it to a freshly
concocted hadith. The third and final step in hadith criticism thus involved looking for
corroboration for the hadith itself.
Corroboration took two general forms. Since a ‘hadīth’ was generally associated with the
Companion who narrated it, another version of the same Prophetic tradition transmitted by a
second Companion or an instance of the Prophet saying something similar on another occasion
were both considered corroboration for a hadith. Such a report was termed a ‘witness
(shāhid).’ When one transmitter corroborated the report related by another transmitter that they
had both heard from a common source, this was termed a ‘parallelism (mutāba‘a).’ Hadith
scholars described these two forms of corroboration with the aphorism ‘parallelism bolsters
the narration, a witness bolsters the tradition.’ A witness report need not be exactly the same
tradition as the hadith it supports. Even a report with a different wording but the same meaning

 corroborated the fact that the Prophet had expressed a certain idea or sentiment. Parallelisms
solidified the reliability of a particular narration of a hadith.
 
Figure 3.2 Corroboration
 
A famous tenth-century hadith critic, Ibn Hibbān, describes the process of searching for
corroboration (called i‘tibār, ‘consideration’) thus:
 
Let us say we come across [the transmitter] Hammād b. Salama, and we see that he has narrated a report from Ayyūb
[al-Sakhtiyānī] 
 Ibn Sīrīn 
 Abū Hurayra 
 the Prophet (s), but we do not find that report from anyone else from
the students of Ayyūb. What is required of us now is to refrain momentarily from criticizing Hammād, and to consider what
his contemporaries narrated. So we must start by looking at this report: Did Hammād’s students in general narrate it from
him, or just one of them? If it is the case that his students narrated it from him, then it has been established that Hammād
really did narrate that report, even if that comes through a weak narrator from him, because that narration is added to the
first narration from Hammād. So if it has been established correctly that Hammād narrated a report from Ayyūb that is not
corroborated by others, again we must pause. For it does not follow automatically that there is some weakness here, but
rather we must ask: Did any of the reliable transmitters (thiqāt) narrate this report from Ibn Sīrīn other than Ayyūb? If we
find one, then it has been established that the report has some basis (asl yarji‘u ilayhi). If not, then we must ask: Did
anyone from among the reliable transmitters narrate this report from Abū Hurayra other than Ibn Sīrīn? If such a narration
is found, then it has been established that the report has a basis (asl). If not, we ask: Did anyone narrate this report from
the Prophet (s) other than Abū Hurayra? If so, then it has been established correctly that the report has some basis. But
when that is not the case, and the report contradicts the compilations of these three [people at three levels in the isnād],
then it is established without a doubt that the report is forged, and that the lone person who narrated it forged it.60
 
As Ibn Hibbān describes, if a report is not corroborated at any one level of the isnād, then the
reliability of that transmitter’s narration from his source is dubious. If the report is
uncorroborated at all levels of the isnād, then it is almost certainly totally baseless. If a report
was not corroborated either at some level of the isnād or from the Prophet in general, early
hadith critics deemed it ‘unacceptable (munkar).’
Here we see that Muslim critics worked backwards in time when authenticating hadiths.

 What probably first occurs to readers today (as is clear in the hadith charts in this book), is that
an isnād ‘starts’ with the Prophet and ‘ends’ when the hadith is recorded in a book. But this
assumes that the hadith actually existed in the time of the Prophet and that we are merely
tracing how it came to us. For a Muslim hadith critic, a hadith was at first just an unverified
claim; its isnād began with the person who told him the hadith. It only extended backward in
time when the critic verified each link in the isnād, step by step, until it ‘reached (wasl)’ the
Prophet.
Of course, this process of demanding corroboration took context into consideration. As
Muslim b. al-Hajjāj informs us, ‘If it has been established that your hadith corpus agrees with
those of the other reliable narrators, then narrating some uncorroborated material is
acceptable.’61 If a transmitter studied with a certain teacher for ten years, then it is not
surprising that he might narrate a selection of hadiths from his teacher that students who only
studied with him for six months did not recount. The great critic Abū Hātim al-Rāzī was asked
to criticize ‘Abdallāh b. Sālih, the secretary of Layth b. Sa‘d, for having narrated
uncorroborated hadiths from Layth. Abū Hātim replied sarcastically, ‘You ask me this about the
closest person to Layth, who was with him on voyages and at home and spent much time alone
with him?’62 But, Muslim continues, if some lesser known transmitter narrated a hadith from a
prolific hadith scholar like al-Zuhrī whose numerous and respected students did not recognize
that hadith, then that report would be automatically declared ‘unacceptable (munkar).’63
Like our modern investigative reporter’s source, however, a transmitter could earn such a
level of confidence in the eyes of critics that he could narrate uncorroborated reports without
arousing concern. Critics like al-Bukhārī and Ibn ‘Adī had examined the hadiths of master
transmitters like al-Zuhrī, Mālik, Ibn al-Mubārak or Qutayba b. Sa‘īd and found that they were
corroborated to such a great extent that they could be relied upon for a number of
uncorroborated hadiths as well. These figures were so central to hadith transmission in general
that if anyone were to have heard a rare hadith, it would be them. An uncorroborated hadith
narrated by an isnād of such pillars was known as ‘an authentic rare (sahīh gharīb)’ hadith.
The hadith of Mālik 
 al-Zuhrī 
 Anas that the Prophet entered Mecca upon its conquest
with a mail helmet on his head and ordered the killing of Ibn Khatal, an infamous enemy of
Islam, was known only by this isnād. Because this hadith was narrated by transmitters whose
collections of hadiths were vaster than almost any other people of their time, this hadith was
considered authentic even though it was uncorroborated.64
Conversely, less stellar figures inspired no such confidence. As al-Tirmidhī explained,
‘Anyone from whom a hadith is narrated who is accused [of poor performance in hadith] or is
criticized as weak in hadiths for his lack of carefulness and numerous mistakes, if that hadith is
only known through that narration, it cannot be used as proof.’ So the hadith narrated by the
lone isnād of Nāsih al-‘Ajamī 
 Simāk b. Harb 
 Jābir b. Samura 
 the Prophet: ‘For a
man to teach his child proper manners is better than to give a whole bushel in charity
(li’an yu’addiba al-rajul waladahu khayr min an yatasaddaqa bi-sa’)’ was considered
unacceptable (munkar) because neither Nāsih nor Simāk were consistently reliable
transmitters.65

 Books of ‘Ilal al-Hadīth
Even when an isnād looked perfect, early hadith critics did not completely ignore the need for
comparing it with other narrations of the report. As the eleventh-century critic al-Khalīlī (d.
446/1054) warned, ‘Even if a hadith is provided to you with an isnād from al-Zuhrī or another
one of the masters, do not declare it authentic merely because of that isnād, for even a reliable
transmitter (thiqa) can err.’66 By comparing different versions of the same hadith, critics could
uncover flaws, known as ‘ilal, which might have evaded the best transmitter. Such flaws
included one narration of a hadith adding additional words into the text of the report that are
not found in more reliable versions. A very common flaw was that one narrator would confuse
a Companion’s or Successor’s statement with a Prophetic hadith. The great ‘ilal critic of
Baghdad, al-Dāraqutnī, found such an error in Muslim’s famous Sahīh. By examining all the
narrations of a report describing how God will grant the believers a vision of Himself on the
Day of Judgment, al-Dāraqutnī concluded that these were actually the words of the Successor
‘Abd al-Rahmān Ibn Abī Laylā (d. 82/701–2) and not of the Prophet.67
To uncover these ‘ilal, a critic would gather all the narrations of a hadith and attempt to
determine which ones were the most reliable. If the majority of respected transmitters, for
example, reported that a certain saying was the statement of a Companion, even one strong
isnād tracing that report back to the Prophet would be considered a mistake.
This advanced level of seeking out corroboration and comparing narrations was set down in
books of ‘ilal, a genre that flourished in the ninth and tenth centuries. The ‘ilal works of ‘Alī b.
al-Madīnī, Ibn Hanbal, and Ibn Abī Hātim al-Rāzī were very famous, but the massive ‘ilal
book of al-Dāraqutnī, published in eleven volumes, dwarfs them all. After the 1000s, ‘ilal
books became rare, and only unusually competent later critics like the Moroccan Ibn al-Qattān
al-Fāsī (d. 628/1231) or Ibn al-Jawzī (d. 597/1201) produced them. ‘Ilal criticism was only
possible for critics in the early period when hadiths were still narrated by full isnāds and
critics had access to versions of reports that may not have survived into later times.68 As al-
Suyūtī admitted, by the 1400s hadith critics did not have the vast array of musannafs, hadith
notebooks, and dictation sessions available to a scholar like al-Dāraqutnī. Such later scholars
could only judge hadiths based on material they received from earlier critics.69
CONTENT CRITICISM: THE HIDDEN COMPONENT OF EARLY HADITH CRITICISM
When we think of how one should evaluate the reliability of things we hear, we focus on their
content as much as their source. Even the most trustworthy source would arouse suspicion if he
announced that aliens had landed in his backyard. Yet when we thumb through books of
transmitter criticism or ‘ilal, one of the most obvious characteristics of early hadith criticism is
that early scholars almost never discussed the contents of hadith, let alone explicitly rejected a
hadith because its meaning was unacceptable. Why is this?
Certainly, the esteem in which Muslims held Muhammad and their belief that God spoke to
him of the distant past and events to come affected their approach to criticizing hadiths. Unlike
a modern person skeptically dismissing the sayings of a television psychic, a Muslim critic
would not declare a report attributed to Muhammad to be a forgery simply because it

 described something that average men could not know.
Nonetheless, we know that early critics like al-Bukhārī and Muslim were willing and able to
reject a hadith because they found its contents inherently flawed. In his entry on the transmitter
‘Awn b. ‘Umāra al-Qaysī in his ‘Great Book of Weak Transmitters,’ al-Bukhārī noted that one
of the unacceptable hadiths he narrated was ‘The signs of the Day of Judgment are after the
year 200/815.’ Al-Bukhārī rejects the hadith because ‘these two hundred years have passed,
and none of these signs have appeared.’70 In another work on transmitters, al-Bukhārī criticizes
Muhammad b. Fadā’ because he narrated the hadith ‘The Prophet forbade breaking apart
Muslim coins in circulation.’ Al-Bukhārī notes that Muslims did not mint coins until early
Umayyad times, ‘they did not exist at the time of the Prophet.’71 Muslim b. al-Hajjāj rejects a
hadith saying that there are five chapters of the Quran that are the equivalent of one-fourth of
the holy book – a total of five-fourths. He calls this logical contradiction ‘reprehensible, and it
is not conceivable that its meaning is correct.’72 But why were such instances of content
criticism so rare?
To answer this question, we have to remember that Sunni hadith criticism emerged in the
context of intense ideological struggle between the ahl al-hadīth and the school of early
Muslim rationalists, known as the Mu‘tazila. For the Mu‘tazila, the only sources on which one
could rely to interpret properly Islamic law and dogma were the Quran, reports from the
Prophet that were so well-known they could not possibly be forged, and human reason (‘aql).
In order to know if any hadith was authentically from the Prophet, Mu‘tazilite scholars like
Abū al-Qāsim al-Balkhī (d. 319/931) believed that it had to agree with the Quran and reason.
For Mu‘tazilites, the idea that one could examine the isnād of the hadith to know if it was
reliable or not was preposterous. The Mu‘tazilite master Abū ‘Alī al-Jubbā’ī (d. 303/915–16)
was once asked to evaluate two hadiths narrated through the same isnād. He declared the first
hadith authentic but rejected the second as false. When a surprised student asked al-Jubbā‘ī,
‘Two hadiths with the same isnād, you authenticate one and reject the other?’, al-Jubbā’ī
replied that the second one could not be the words of the Prophet because ‘the Quran
demonstrates its falsity, as does the consensus of the Muslims and the evidence of reason.’73
The ahl al-hadīth’s understanding of man’s relationship to religion was the converse. Only
by submitting oneself completely to the uncorrupted ways of the Prophet and early Muslim
community as transmitted through the isnād could one truly obey God and His Messenger.
Unlike the Mu‘tazila, whom they saw as arrogantly glorifying human reason, or the ahl al-ra’y,
whom they viewed as rejecting or accepting hadiths arbitrarily when it suited their legal
opinion, the ahl al-hadīth perceived themselves as ‘cultivating the ways of the Messenger,
fending off heretical innovation and lies from revealed knowledge.’74 It was not man’s right to
question the revealed religion that the Prophet brought and that was preserved from him
through the isnād. We thus find the Companion ‘Imrān b. Husayn (d. 52/672) instructing new
Muslims that the Prophet had said, ‘Whoever is grieved for [by his family] will be punished
[for that mourning] (man yunāhu ‘alayhi yu‘adhdhab).’ When a person questioned the
reasonableness of this notion, ‘Imrān replied, ‘The Messenger of God has spoken the truth, and
you have disbelieved!’75 A defender of the ahl al-hadīth against the Mu‘tazila, Ibn Qutayba (d.

 276/889) states:
 
We do not resort except to that to which the Messenger of God resorted. And we do not reject what has been transmitted
authentically from him because it does not accord with our conjectures or seem correct to reason ... we hope that in this
lies the path to salvation and escape from the baseless whims of heresy.76
 
But we know from the examples above that early Sunni hadith critics did note problems in the
meanings of certain hadiths. In their context, however, it is clear why they could not do so
openly. The whole purpose of the isnād was to guarantee that the Prophet said something
without relying on man’s flawed reason. If hadith critics admitted that a hadith could have an
authentic isnād but still be a forgery because its meaning was unacceptable, then they would be
admitting that their rationalist opponents were correct! If you could not have a strong isnād
with a forged report, then any problem in the meaning of a hadith must mean that there was a
problem in the isnād. When ahl al-hadīth critics like al-Bukhārī came across a hadith whose
meaning they found unacceptable, they examined the isnād to find how the error occurred and
listed the hadith in the biography of that transmitter as evidence of his weakness. Ibn ‘Adī often
states that the questionable hadiths that a certain transmitter narrates ‘demonstrate that he is
unreliable.’
The Emergence of Mawdū‘āt Books and Open Content Criticism after 1100 CE
Because early hadith criticism was so openly focused on the isnād as the primary means of
authentication, it was very often difficult to tell when a critic was rejecting a whole Prophetic
tradition or just one narration of that hadith. The term ‘unacceptable (munkar)’ for a hadith
could mean that this version of the hadith narrated through a certain isnād was unreliable but
other authentic versions existed, or that the tradition was entirely forged. Another phrase used
to reject a hadith, ‘it has no basis (laysa lahu asl),’ could mean that the hadith had no basis
from that transmitter (but was well established from others) or that the Prophetic tradition was
baseless in general. But even concluding that the terms munkar or lā asl lahu denoted ‘forged’
does not necessarily mean that the critic found the meaning of the hadith in question
unacceptable. As Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr (d. 463/1070) explained, ‘How many hadiths are there with
a weak isnād but a correct meaning?’77 Al-Tirmidhī notes that Yahyā al-Qattān had declared the
following hadith narrated by Anas b. Mālik to be munkar: ‘A man said, “O Messenger of God,
should I tie up [the camel] and trust in God or leave it free and trust in God.” The Prophet said,
“Tie it up and trust in God.” ’ Al-Tirmidhī adds that this report was totally baseless from
Anas, ‘but its likes have been narrated from another Companion ‘Amr b. Umayya al-Damrī,
from the Prophet.’78
Starting in the late 1000s, however, as the Mu‘tazilite rationalist threat faded from view and
Sunni Islam emerged triumphant, hadith critics began writing books that rejected whole
Prophetic traditions, often because their meanings were unacceptable. These books were
known as works of mawdū‘āt, which listed ‘mawdū‘,’ or ‘forged’ hadiths. The earliest known
mawdū‘āt book, unfortunately lost to us, was that of Abū Sa‘īd al-Naqqāsh al-Isbahānī (d.
414/1023).79 The earliest surviving one is the Tadhkirat al-mawdū‘āt of Muhammad b. Tāhir

 al-Maqdisī (d. 507/1113). Perhaps the most famous mawdū‘āt work is the huge Kitāb al-
mawdū‘āt of Ibn al-Jawzī (d. 597/1201). Mawdū‘āt books flourished in later Islamic times,
with well-known works including the Ahādīth al-da‘īfa of Ibn Taymiyya (d. 728/1328), the al-
La’ālī al-masnū‘a of al-Suyūtī, the Asrār al-marfū‘a of Mullā ‘Alī Qārī, the Fawā’id al-
majmū‘a of the Yemeni Muhammad al-Shawkānī (d. 1834), and the Kitāb al-āthār al-marfū‘a
of the Indian ‘Abd al-Hayy al-Laknawī (d. 1886-7). Some of these scholars wrote books on
forged hadiths designed to be useful references for non-experts. ‘Umar b. Badr al-Mawsilī (d.
622/1225), for example, wrote the book Sufficing One from Memorization and Books on
Issues on which there are No Reliable Hadīths (al-Mughnī ‘an al-hifz wa al-kitāb fīmā lam
yasihha shay’ fī al-bāb).
Early mawdū‘āt books listed hadiths along with the isnād flaws that showed they were
forged, relying on the criticisms of specific narrations made by the likes of al-Bukhārī and Ibn
‘Adī. This was highly problematic, since these books implied that any hadith with that wording
was forged, while there might be other, sound narrations. In the mid twelfth century the genre
began shifting to openly rejecting hadiths because of their meaning. The mawdū‘āt book of al-
Jawzaqānī (d. 543/1148–9), for example, states ‘Every hadith that contradicts the Sunna is cast
away and the person who says it is rejected as a transmitter.’80 This process reached a plateau
with the al-Manār al-munīf fī al-sahīh wa al-da‘īf (The Lofty Lighthouse for Authentic and
Weak Hadiths), the mawdū‘āt book of Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya (d. 751/1350), who devoted a
large section of the work to listing all the features of a hadith’s contents that demonstrated it
was forged.
Of course, freely engaging in content criticism was opening a Pandora’s box. A critic might
fall into exactly that trap that the early ahl al-hadīth claimed they were avoiding: making man’s
flawed reason the arbiter of religious truth. Although later critics would maintain, as Ibn al-
Jawzī states, ‘any hadith that you see contradicting reason or fundamental principles [of Islam],
know that it is forged,’ they would also insist that one should not be too hasty in such
judgments. After all, the critic might not have grasped the proper way of reconciling such
contradictions.81 A few Sunni hadith critics in the later period, such as al-Dhahabī and
‘Abdallāh al-Ghumārī, seemed at ease openly rejecting hadiths based on their contents,
sometimes even when their isnāds seemed sound. But the mainstream Sunni tradition is much
better exemplified by scholars like al-Suyūtī and Mullā ‘Alī al-Qārī. The former warned that a
hadith could be rejected due to its contents only after all efforts to reconcile its meaning with
the Quran and established Sunna had failed. And ‘the door of possible interpretation is
definitely wide,’ added al-Qārī. Prominent scholars declared a hadith in which the Prophet
dreamt he saw God as a beardless youth to be a blatant forgery due to its anthropomorphism.
Al-Qārī replied that dreams are merely symbolic, not reality. Thus, he argued, the hadith’s
meaning was sound.82 This tension between submitting one’s reason to a transmitted text and
using one’s reason to evaluate the text’s authenticity has furnished fertile ground for debate
among Muslim scholars until today.
LEVELS OF HADITH, THEIR USES AND THE PRIORITIES OF THE HADITH TRADITION

 From the time of Mālik (d. 179/796) to the late ninth century, hadith critics conceived of
hadiths as falling between two poles in terms of the strength of their isnāds: sahīh (‘sound,’
‘authentic’) and da‘īf/saqīm (‘weak’ or ‘unsound,’ literally ‘sick’). In terms of their level of
corroboration, critics described hadiths as being ‘well-known (mashhūr)’ or ‘unacceptable,
unknown (munkar)’ ones. A hadith that was declared sahīh or mashhūr represented the
authenticated words of the Prophet, while weak or munkar hadiths were those not fully
established as emanating from him.
It is difficult to know exactly how early hadith critics defined sahīh hadiths, since they were
very laconic in their works. Ibn Khuzayma defined the hadiths that he selected for his sahīh
collection as those ‘that an upright (‘adl) transmitter narrates from another upstanding
transmitter continuously to [the Prophet] without any break in the isnād or any impugning of the
transmitters.’83 Later analysts such as Ibn al-Salāh (d. 643/1245) and Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalānī
(d. 852/1449) examined the methodologies of the early masters and defined a sahīh hadith as
one narrated by an unbroken isnād of reliable (thiqa) transmitters, namely those who combined
upstandingness and accuracy, all the way back to Prophet without any concealed flaws (‘ilal)
or contradicting a more reliable source.84
For hadith scholars of the eighth and ninth centuries, any hadith that did not reach the standard
of sahīh was declared ‘weak.’ The category of ‘weak’ hadiths was thus very broad, ranging
from hadiths whose isnāds suggested they were forged to those with relatively minor flaws
(see Figure 3.0). This helps explain why ahl al-hadīth jurists like Ibn Hanbal were willing to
employ hadiths they themselves described as ‘weak’ for deriving laws when no other evidence
was available. The later scholar of Ibn Hanbal’s school of law, Ibn Taymiyya (d. 728/1328),
explains that weak hadiths fell into two categories: 1) those that did not have a sahīh isnād but
were still reliable enough that one could use them in law, 2) hadiths that were so unreliable
that they had to be set aside.85
Beginning with the work of al-Bukhārī’s student Abū ‘Īsā al-Tirmidhī (d. 279/892), hadith
scholars developed a new name to describe the hadiths that were not sahīh but still strong
enough to use as proof in Islamic law: hasan, or ‘fair.’ Al-Tirmidhī describes a hasan hadith
as one that ‘does not have in its isnād someone who is accused of lying or forgery, is not
anomalous (shādhdh), and is narrated via more than one chain of transmission.’86 For al-
Tirmidhī, a hasan hadith was thus a report whose isnād was not seriously flawed and enjoyed
corroboration through other narrations, which mitigated the chances of a serious error creeping
into the text of the report. The later jurist and hadith scholar al-Khattābī (d. 388/998)
described hasan hadiths as those ‘with an established basis and whose transmitters were well-
known.’87
All Sunni scholars have accepted both sahīh and hasan hadiths as compelling proof in
matters of law. As we will discuss in Chapter 6 on the role of hadith in theology, there was
prolonged debate over whether hadiths narrated through a handful of isnāds were reliable
enough to inform Islamic dogma.
Just as we do today, Muslim critics felt that certain topics required more strenuous efforts at
authentication than others. From the times of early critics and ahl al-hadīth jurists like Ibn al-

 Mubārak and Ibn Hanbal, it was accepted that hadiths that were not reliable enough to be
admitted in discussions of law could still be used for other purposes. When Ibn al-Mubārak
was asked what to do with the hadiths of one weak narrator, he replied that they should not be
used as proof in legal discussions. ‘It is still,’ however, ‘possible to narrate from him what he
has on issues like good manners (adab), goodly preaching (maw‘iza), pious abstemiousness
(zuhd) and such things.’88 Ibn Hanbal stated:
 
If we are told hadiths from the Messenger of God concerning what is permissible and forbidden, the sunan and laws, then
we are strict with their isnāds. But if we are told hadiths from the Prophet about the virtues of certain acts (fadā’il al-
a‘māl), or what does not create a rule or remove one, then we are lax with the isnāds.89
 
In addition to moralizing or exhortatory preaching, the standards for hadith authenticity also
dropped for genres outside what was considered the purview of musnad hadiths, or hadiths
with full isnāds originating with the Prophet and generally addressing legal issues. These
included stories about the Prophet’s campaigns and the subsequent Islamic conquests
(maghāzī), reports from Companions and Successors about the meanings of Quranic words or
the contexts in which Quranic verses were revealed (tafsīr) and stories foretelling the end of
days (malāhim). As Ibn Hanbal stated, these three genres ‘had no basis (asl)’ – namely, they
often consisted of statements made by Companions or Successors. In other words, they were
not Prophetic hadiths at all.90
 
Figure 3.3 Rating of Hadiths and Their Uses among the Early and Later Hadith Critics
 
Even when such reports were attributed to the Prophet, the critics’ standards were lax.
Maghāzī, along with what emerged as the genre of ‘history (tārīkh),’ demanded less rigor
because scholars did not feel that they impacted the core of the Islamic tradition: law, dogma,
and ritual. Malāhim hadiths, like hadiths dealing with good manners or urging Muslims to do
good deeds, were admitted for use in teaching even if their contents were not reliable, because

 they encouraged Muslims to fear God.
Here we can note a remarkable feature of the way in which Sunni Muslims understood the
boundaries of religion and prioritized the functions of scripture. Today we consider the stories
that religious traditions tell about the apocalypse and the means by which they propagate a
moral vision of the world to be essential dimensions of a faith. For Muslims in the classical
period, however, they were merely tools by which scholars could purvey the true substance of
Islam, which the hadith tradition was designed to preserve: law, ritual, and essential beliefs
about God.
ENTER LEGAL THEORY: MUSLIM LEGAL THEORISTS AND THEIR EFFECT ON HADITH CRITICISM
Ahl al-hadīth jurists like al-Shāfi‘ī, his student Ibn Hanbal and his student al-Bukhārī
understood well that one could not simply take every hadith that one heard from the Prophet as
the law. Even if a legal hadith was authentic, the Prophet could have said it in a specific
circumstance, intended it for a specific person, or changed the ruling mentioned in the hadith
later on. Senior scholars were thus venerated not only for their knowledge of hadiths, but also
for their ability to understand how those hadiths related to one another, fit under, added to or
modified Quranic rulings. Early expressions of the ahl al-hadīth legal theory appear in the
chapter of al-Bukhārī’s Sahīh on holding fast to the Quran and Sunna, and most eminently in al-
Shāfi‘ī’s works the Umm and the Risāla.
Another tradition of legal theory developed parallel to that of the ahl al-hadīth. Hanafī
jurists of the ninth century, many of whom subscribed to the Mu‘tazilite rationalist outlook,
derived this system partially from the Hellenistic tradition of philosophy prevalent in the Near
East before Islam. In addition to the ahl al-hadīth division of hadiths into sahīh/hasan/da‘īf or
mashhūr/munkar, the Hanafī/Mu‘tazilite school of legal theory elaborated a gradated system
based on the level of certainty that various forms of reports conveyed. Reports about the past,
whether hadiths or simply historical accounts, that were so widespread that they could not
have been forged by any one group were called mutawātir (massively transmitted) and yielded
epis-temologically certain knowledge (‘ilm yaqīn). One might not have ever actually gone to
China, but the number of reports that one has heard about it convey utter certainty that the place
actually exists. There was a wide range of opinions among Mu‘tazilite scholars about how
many transmissions of a report were required to make it mutawātir, with scholars asserting
anywhere from four (the number of witnesses required in Islamic law to prove a case of
adultery) to seventy (the number of people believed to have accompanied Moses up Mount
Sinai to receive the Ten Commandments). This number was required at every stage of
transmission. Any hadith that did not fulfill the requirements for a mutawātir hadith was known
as āhād, or a hadith of individual narrators. Unlike mutawātir hadiths, āhād hadiths only
yielded strong probability (zann) of what the report described.
As we have seen, Mu‘tazilites had no compunction about making content criticism the
centerpiece of their method of hadith evaluation. The Hanafī judge ‘Īsā b. Abān (d. 221/836)
thus argued that the early Muslim community rejected āhād reports that contradicted the Quran
or established Sunna, or described an event that would have been more widely reported had it

 really occurred. He also makes the verdict of reason the ultimate arbiter for judging the
veracity of a report, not the isnād.91
Although Sunnis considered Mu‘tazilism to be a heresy, Mu‘tazilite legal theory and its
perspective on hadiths had a major impact on Sunni legal theory. A seminal figure in Sunni
legal theory and theology, Abū al-Hasan al-Ash‘arī (d. 324/935–6), was a former Mu‘tazilite
who had embraced the Sunni theological worldview and then used Mu‘tazilite rationalism to
defend it. The major architects of what is known as the Jumhūr (Majority) school of Sunni
legal theory followed in his footsteps, essentially tailoring Mu‘tazilite thought to the contours
of Sunni belief. In the early 1000s, two of the most influential Shāfi‘ī legal theorists, al-Qādī
‘Abd al-Jabbār (d. 415/1025) and his student Abū al-Husayn al-Basrī (d. 436/1044), were
actually Mu‘tazilites in their conception of knowledge and theology. Their works in this field
greatly informed the scholars who defined Sunni legal theory after them, such as al-Juwaynī (d.
478/1085) and his student Abū Hāmid al-Ghazālī (d. 505/1111).
With the work of the hadith master al-Khatīb al-Baghdādī (d. 463/1071), the Mu‘tazilite-
inspired thinking of Sunni legal theorists entered Sunni hadith criticism. Specifically, al-Khatīb
and all the theorists of hadith criticism who followed him adopted the division of hadiths into
mutawātir and āhād (which we will discuss in more depth in Chapter 6) along with the levels
of certainty they yielded. Mutawātir hadiths yielded total certainty that the Prophet had in fact
said the report, while āhād hadiths yielded only strong probability. This was, however, strong
enough for them to be used in deriving law.
Sunni legal theorists introduced a middle tier between āhād and mutawātir dubbed ‘wide-
spread (mashhūr or mustafīd).’ These hadiths were reports that started out as āhād, being
transmitted by only a few people in the first few generations, before spreading out and
becoming mutawātir. But because these hadiths had been accepted as reliable by the
community of scholars, they were known to be authentic. This was based on the Sunni belief,
phrased in the Prophet’s words, that ‘God will not let my community agree on an error’ (see
Chapter 5). Hadith criticism also absorbed the principles of content criticism described by Ibn
Abān.
The result of this merging was a composite tradition that joined two perspectives on hadith
criticism that were originally in opposition, if not antithetical, to one another. Since the
eleventh century, Sunni hadith criticism has therefore produced many internal contradictions.
The most prominent display of this schizophrenia has been theories of hadith criticism that do
not correspond to the work of hadith critics. We have already seen how the Sunni legal
theorist’s definition of upstanding character (‘adāla) did not apply at all to the criteria that
early hadith critics like al-Bukhārī used to determine the reliability of a narrator. In terms of
content criticism, al-Khatīb al-Baghdādī affirms the principles derived from Ibn Abān. Not
once, however, in the course of his criticism of the thousands of hadiths in his vast History of
Baghdad, does al-Khatīb openly reject a hadith because its contents were unacceptable! As
mentioned earlier, it was not until the mawdū‘āt work of al-Jawzaqānī (d. 543/1148–9) and
those who followed him that Sunni hadith critics actually overtly applied rules of content
criticism in the course of their hadith evaluations. Even then their use of content criticism was

 fraught with tension. Essentially every Sunni hadith scholar since al-Khatīb has upheld Ibn
Abān’s rules of content criticism. But few have ever applied them.92
The categories of mutawātir and āhād were similarly unsuitable for the hadith tradition, for
essentially all hadiths were āhād. As Ibn al-Salāh (d. 643/1245), the most famous scholar of
hadith criticism in the later period, explained, at most one hadith (‘Whoever lies about me
intentionally, let him prepare for himself a seat in Hellfire’) would meet the requirements
for mutawātir.93 No hadiths could actually be described as being narrated by a large number of
narrators at every stage of their transmission. In fact, when Mu‘tazilites had insisted that
hadiths be transmitted by a mere two people at every stage, the Sunni Ibn Hibbān had accused
them of trying to destroy the Sunna of the Prophet in its entirety.94
THE ‘BIG TENT’ OF THE LATE SUNNI TRADITION: INCREASED ACCEPTANCE AND USE OF WEAK HADITHS
The absorption of Mu‘tazilite legal theory into the Sunni hadith tradition in the 1000s is
indicative of the major changes that occurred in the later period of hadith criticism. From the
eleventh century onward, hadith criticism would be characterized by an increasing distance
from the methods of early critics. Especially with the solidification of the Late Sunni Tradition
in the 1300s, we can see a tendency towards authenticating more and more hadiths that had
previously been considered outside the pale of usage. Partially explained by the broader
perspective enjoyed by later critics and partially justified by manipulations of the methods of
hadith critics, hadith criticism became an increasingly ‘Big Tent’ of inclusivity.
We note the beginning of the critical laxity of the later period in the Mustadrak collection of
al-Hākim al-Naysābūrī (d. 405/1014), in which the author claimed he had collected thousands
of hadiths that met the authenticity requirements of al-Bukhārī and Muslim. In reality, however,
al-Hākim’s methods of authentication fell far short of his two predecessors. He declared a
hadith authentic if its isnād consisted of transmitters used in the Sahīhayn or transmitters
similar to them. The later analyst Jamāl al-Dīn al-Zayla‘ī (d. 762/1361), however, uncovered
the weakness at the heart of al-Hākim’s strategy: he had relied on the same transmitters as al-
Bukhārī and Muslim, but he did not examine the hadiths for corroboration or ensure contiguous
transmission.95 According to al-Dhahabī, only half of the Mustadrak’s contents were actually
authentic. The other half was of dubious reliability.96
Neglecting the need for corroboration has been a hallmark of later hadith criticism. Whereas
a critic like al-Bukhārī would accept a hadith narrated by only one chain of transmission as
long as it consisted of master scholars like al-Zuhrī and Mālik, later critics often authenticated
hadiths based on only one chain regardless of the infer-ior standing of some transmitters. Ibn
Abī Hātim, Ibn ‘Adī, and other early critics had declared the hadith saying that ‘The most
truthful speech is that said after sneezing’ was weak or forged. In the thirteenth century,
however, al-Nawawī (d. 676/1277) argued for its reliability based on a solitary narration from
the Musnad of Abū Ya‘lā al-Mawsilī (d. 307/919) even though one of its transmitters had been
severely impugned.97
Later critics did have one tangible advantage over earlier critics. A later scholar like Ibn
Hajar or al-Suyūtī had access to works that consolidated and synthesized the vast and diverse

 expanse of the hadith corpus as well as collections that might not have been within reach of an
early critic. As the case studies at the end of this chapter demonstrate, where early critics like
al-Bukhārī or al-Tirmidhī had access to only some narrations of a Prophetic tradition when
they declared it weak, in the 1400s Ibn Hajar could take into consideration additional
narrations that might raise that hadith to hasan or sahīh status. Ibn al-Salāh used the term
‘hasan due to other narrations (hasan li-ghayrihi)’ and ‘authentic due to other narrations
(sahīh li-ghayrihi)’ to describe this procedure. The twentieth-century Moroccan hadith scholar
Ahmad al-Ghumārī (d. 1960) exemplified later scholars’ access to material out of the reach of
an early critic by writing a book entitled (Laysa kadhālik)’, (Not So), in which he rebuts a
series of statements that early critics like Ibn Hanbal made about transmitters and hadiths
based on new evidence.
Of course, while later critics could authenticate a hadith that had previously been considered
unreliable, the opposite was theoretically very difficult. When al-Bukhārī judged a hadith to be
sahīh, his decision was based on information about the hadith that may have been lost to
history. As Ibn Taymiyya explains, ‘whatever hadiths reached [early scholars] and that they
deemed authentic may only have come down to us through unknown transmitters, broken isnāds
or not at all.’98 How, then, could a later scholar question the authentication of an earlier
master?
Not all the previously inaccessible evidence to which later hadith critics had access,
however, was reliable according to the hadith critical method. Scholars of the Late Sunni
Tradition made large numbers of hadiths admissible in religious discourse by exploiting the
tremendous range of questionable hadiths found in the late musnad collections of the tenth to
twelfth centuries as well as the principle that weak hadiths were acceptable as proof on non-
legal issues. Basing their argument on the above-mentioned stance of early masters like Ibn
Hanbal, leading late Sunni scholars like al-Nawawī and al-Suyūtī all agreed that as long as a
hadith was not forged it could be used in any discussion not concerning the prohibition and
permissibility of an act.99 In order to raise a hadith to the level of admissibility in such cases,
all a scholar had to do was prove that it was not forged – proving that it was merely ‘weak’
sufficed. This was the course of action that al-Suyūtī admitted to taking when he presented
hadiths supporting his argument that the Prophet’s parents were destined for Heaven even
though they had never known Islam during their lives.
In order to rehabilitate a hadith that critics had earlier declared a forgery, one had to provide
evidence that it had some ‘basis (asl)’ in the early Islamic tradition. For example, even though
there might not be enough evidence to trace a hadith authentically to the Prophet, a weak hadith
might be the result of a Companion’s statement or an early legal ruling that had accidentally
been attributed to Muhammad. It was still a legitimate indicator of proper Islamic values.
The most frequently cited sources for finding such an ‘asl’ for a hadith were the Musnad al-
Shihāb of al-Qudā‘ī and the Musnad al-Firdaws of al-Daylamī, both late works infamous for
the unreliability of their contents. When Mullā ‘Alī Qārī argued for accepting the hadith
‘Wiping one’s neck [during ablutions] is protection against fetters [on the Day of
Judgment] (mash al-raqaba amān min al-ghill),’ which al-Nawawī had said was forged and

 which other critics had declared a Companion statement, he announced that a Prophetic version
was found in the Musnad al-Firdaws and thus that the hadith was weak, not forged. ‘And weak
hadiths,’ he added, ‘are acted on by consensus for establishing the virtues of actions.’100
When attempting to raise a weak hadith to the status of ‘hasan due to other narrations,’ the
evidence to which later critics often resorted were the narrations that earlier critics like Ibn
‘Adī or al-Bukhārī had listed in their weak transmitter collections to show a certain person’s
flawed hadiths! (See Case Study Two in this chapter). Although the early masters Ibn Ma‘īn,
al-Bukhārī, Abū Zur‘a al-Rāzī, al-Tirmidhī, Ibn ‘Adī, al-Dāraqutnī, and al-Khatīb al-Baghdādī
all declared that various versions of the hadith ‘I am the city of knowledge and ‘Alī is its
gate’ were baseless, later critics such as al-‘Alā’ī (d. 761/1359), Ibn Hajar, and al-Suyūtī all
agreed that, when taken together, these narrations made the hadith hasan.101
The final means by which hadiths achieved exaggerated authority in the Late Sunni Tradition
was the exploitation of the concept of mutawātir reports. It was accepted by consensus among
Sunni scholars that if a report had reached the level of mutawātir it was utterly certain that the
Prophet had said it. Although scholars like Ibn al-Salāh had declared that no such hadith
existed in actuality, al-Suyūtī composed a collection titled al-Azhār al-mutanāthira fī al-
ahādīth al-mutawātira (The Scattered Flowers of Massively Transmitted Hadiths) in which he
included 111 hadiths he declared mutawātir because ten or more Companions had narrated it
from the Prophet. But a mutawātir hadith had to have such a number of isnāds at every level of
transmission, and not all the chains of transmission that al-Suyūtī used as evidence were
reliable to begin with. Because the concept of mutawātir was so ambiguous, later critics
frequently abused the label to argue for the undeniable authenticity of a hadith they were citing.
Although earlier scholars had agreed that the hadith ‘My community will not agree on an
error’ lacked any fully sahīh isnāds, ‘Abdallāh al-Ghumārī (d. 1993) claimed that it was
mutawātir.
How do we explain seemingly deceptive tactics like the exploit-ation of weak hadiths by late
Sunni scholars? Were they not pious defenders of the hadith tradition, whose whole purpose
was ‘to ward off lies from the Prophet of God’? Although we might note that the Late Sunni
Tradition was very permissive with hadiths, scholars like al-Suyūtī felt they were on firm
ground. In the case of the Prophet’s parents going to heaven, after all, al-Suyūtī did not just
have hadiths in mind when attempting to prove his case. He had the whole heritage of Islamic
thought at his disposal, such as Quranic verses saying that ‘No bearer of burdens will bear the
burdens of another’ and theological principles such as the Sunni tenet that people born in a
community before its prophet arrives will not be held accountable for ignorance of God’s
religion. As we shall see in Chapter 5, in the early period of Islam, if the Muslim community’s
practice agreed with a hadith then that hadith was considered reliable even if its isnād was
poor. This was the same approach taken by the Late Sunni Tradition; if centuries of Muslim
scholars had agreed that the meaning of a hadith was accurate, then ascribing it to the Prophet
was acceptable as well. As Ibn al-Qayyim said, such a hadith, ‘even if it has not been
established as reliable, the fact that it has been acted on in all regions and eras with no
rejection is sufficient for us to act on it.’102 Of course, this assumes that those centuries of

 Muslim scholars were right.
AUTHENTICATING HADITHS BY DREAMS OR INSPIRATION
Islamic civilization has accorded great credence to dreams or inspired visions in which
Muslims encounter the Prophet. This is based on two sahīh hadiths: ‘Nothing of prophethood
will remain after me except righteous nightly dreams,’103 and ‘Whoever has seen me in a
dream has seen me while awake, for indeed Satan does not assume my form.’104 Seeing the
Prophet in a dream is thus a reliable experience with probative value. Muslim jurists and legal
theorists, however, have agreed unanimously that, while a vision of the Prophet may reveal
truths to someone concerning personal matters, it cannot have any effect on law or formal
relationships. It cannot excuse you from work or school.105
In the first few centuries of the hadith tradition, dreams and visions therefore played a
colorful but ultimately superficial role in hadith authentication. Al-Tabarānī had a dream in
which he asked the Prophet about the status of the hadith, ‘The believers in their mercy
towards one another are like a man part of whose body is in pain – the rest of his body
feels the pain.’ The Prophet replied ‘Sahīh, sahīh, sahīh!’ This hadith, however, had already
been authenticated by al-Bukhārī and Muslim, so al-Tabarānī’s inspired vision effected no
change in its standing.106
The Late Sunni Tradition was characterized by a more prominent and novel method of
facilitating hadith authentication: illuminating inspiration, or ‘kashf’ (literally, ‘unveiling’).
This method was developed by the influential and highly controversial Sufi systematizer Ibn
‘Arabī (d. 638/1240). For Ibn ‘Arabī, receiving revelatory inspi-ration (kashf) from contact
with God’s ultimate truth as reflected in the ‘Muhammadan reality’ (see Chapter 7), was one of
the three means by which a human could acquire sound religious knowledge. Unlike the other
two methods, rational investigation and prophetic revelation, however, kashf allowed the saint
on whom God bestowed this power to place the knowledge attained by these other methods in
their proper place.107
As Ibn ‘Arabī explained, weak hadiths are not valid proofs because they lack a reliable
isnād. But some of these reports might in fact be real sayings of the Prophet that have gone
unrecognized because of poor transmitters. If one could find a reliable isnād for such a hadith,
then it could be acted on. A saint who receives direct, unveiling knowledge from God is like a
Companion hearing this hadith from the Prophet, except that he hears it from the eternal
Prophetic light. His inspiration can inform him that the Prophet actually said that hadith since,
like a Companion, the saint is actually in the Prophet’s presence.
Like other legal theorists, however, Ibn ‘Arabī acknowledges that a hadith authenticated by
kashf cannot be used in legal arguments. But he does contend that kashf can reveal to a saint
that a certain hadith that had been authenticated by traditional hadith criticism was in fact
forged.108
Hadith critics of the Late Sunni Tradition adopted Ibn ‘Arabī’s belief that inspiration
provided proof that a hadith was authentic provided that it did not affect law, although the
technique has found little use outside the work of a few scholars like the North African Sufi

 ‘Abd al-‘Azīz al-Dabbāgh (d. 1719) (who claimed to have heard hadiths from the Prophet via
the sole intermediary of the enigmatic character of Muslim legend, Khidr).109 Almost no critics
have accepted that kashf could overrule a sahīh ruling arrived at by the traditional methods of
hadith criticism. Some scholars have squarely rejected any allowance for kashf in hadith – the
Egyptian Mālikī scholar Muhammad ‘Illaysh (d. 1882) stated, ‘There is no room for such laxity
in the religion of God, and sainthood and miracles have no role in this issue [of hadith
authentication]. Rather, recourse is to the hadith masters knowledgeable about this matter.’110
APPLYING HADITH CRITICISM TO THE REST OF ISLAMICCIVILIZATION: TAKHRĪJ AND MUSHTAHIR BOOKS
By the 1200s the collection of hadiths had come to an end, and hadith scholars devoted
themselves to consolidation, commentary, and criticism. With the hadith canon firmly
established, hadith critics turned their attention away from hadith collections and towards the
manner in which other areas of Islamic scholarship used hadiths. In books of takhrīj, a rash of
which appeared during the 1300s and 1400s, a hadith scholar took a book from another genre
and discussed the status of the hadiths it contained. Since few books outside hadith collections
featured isnāds when they quoted hadiths, takhrīj books first provided all the hadith
collections that provided chains of transmission for a hadith and then discussed its reliability.
The earliest known takhrīj book was the work that ‘Abd al-‘Azīm al-Mundhirī (d. 656/1258)
devoted to the Muhadhdhab, a major work of Shāfi‘ī law written by Abū Ishāq al-Shīrāzī (d.
476/1083). Many takhrīj books devoted to works of Islamic law followed. The Hanafī al-
Zayla‘ī produced his famous Nasb al-rāya (Erecting the Standard), a takhrīj of the hadiths in
the Hidāya, a formative Hanafī law book by al-Marghīnānī (d. 593/1196–7). Ibn al-Mulaqqin
(d. 804/1401) and Ibn Hajar wrote their Badr al-munīr and Talkhīs al-habīr respectively, both
devoted to the hadiths included in the major Shāfi‘ī legal text of al-Rāfi‘ī. Several takhrīj
books dealt with the hadiths cited in prominent books of legal theory, such as Ibn Kathīr’s
Tuhfat al-tālib, which addressed the contents of Ibn al-Hājib’s abridged treatise on legal
theory. Ibn Hajar also devoted a takhrīj work to the Kashhāf, the famous Quranic commentary
by al-Zamakhsharī (d. 538/1144). Renowned Sufi texts also attracted takhrīj’s. Ibn Hajar’s
teacher Zayn al-Dīn al-‘Irāqī (d. 806/1404) wrote a very critical takhrīj of the hadiths that the
great Sufi al-Ghazālī had used as proof in his famous but controversial opus, the Ihyā’ ‘ulūm
al-dīn (Revival of the Religious Sciences). Ibn Hajar’s student, Shams al-Dīn al-Sakhāwī (d.
902/1497), wrote a takhrīj of al-Sulamī’s popular Forty Hadith collection on Sufism.
Later hadith scholars also directed their hadith criticism towards Muslim society as a whole.
A whole genre of books emerged that took takhrīj ‘to the streets,’ examining hadiths that were
widespread in Muslim society. Ibn al-Jawzī, Ibn Taymiyya, and al-‘Irāqī each wrote a book
analyzing and criticizing the often baseless hadiths recited by popular storytellers (qussās).
Books of ‘mushtahir,’ or ‘well-known,’ hadiths examined hadiths popular in everyday Muslim
life in order to determine if they had any basis in the Prophet’s speech and judge their
reliability. Badr al-Dīn al-Zarkashī (d. 794/1392) wrote the first known book in this genre. Al-
Sakhāwī’s al-Maqāsid al-hasana and Ismā‘īl al-‘Ajlūnī’s (d. 1748-9) Kashf al-khafā’ are the
most famous books on mushtahir hadiths.

 HADITH CRITICISM CASE STUDY ONE: CAN YOU PUT YOUR SHOES ON STANDING OR NOT?
Having traced the origins and development of Sunni hadith criticism, let us take a look at their
methods in action. Our first case study is the report ‘The Prophet forbade people from
putting on their shoes while standing (nahā Rasūl Allāh ‘an yanta‘ila al-rajul qā’iman),’
which appears in the Sunans of Ibn Mājah, al-Tirmidhī, and Abū Dāwūd, as well as the Tārīkh
al-kabīr of al-Bukhārī and the Musnad of Abū Ya‘lā al-Mawsilī.
 
Figure 3.4 Hadith Prohibiting Putting on one’s Shoes while Standing: the Transmission of Abū Hurayra
 
This was not seen as an extremely important legal issue. Even those who upheld the
authenticity of the hadith maintained that the Prophet was suggesting that people put on their
shoes while seated because this was easier. But the question was the subject of some
disagreement: the Tabaqāt of Ibn Sa‘d and the Musannafs of Ibn Abī Shayba and ‘Abd al-
Razzāq al-San‘ānī include reports that Aisha and the prominent Successor scholars Ibn Sīrīn,
Ibrāhīm al-Nakha‘ī, and al-Hasan al-Basrī all saw no problem with putting on one’s shoes
while standing. The Companion Abū Hurayra and the early scholar Yahyā b. Abī Kathīr,
however, are reported to have discouraged the practice.
 

 Figure 3.5 Hadith Prohibiting Putting on one’s Shoes while Standing: the Transmission of Anas b. Mālik
 
The Muslim hadith critic’s first step in evaluating a Prophetic trad-ition would be to collect
all the available narrations of the report. These could be scattered everywhere from hadith
collections to books of law, history, or Quranic exegesis. Once this was done, the critic would
organize all these narrations according to the Companions who narrated them, since the
transmission of each Companion is technically a hadith distinct from those of other
Companions, who might have heard the report from the Prophet at another time. The critic
would then examine the hadith of each Companion one by one to establish its reliability.
 

 Figure 3.6 Hadith Prohibiting Putting on one’s Shoes while Standing: the Transmission of Jābir b.‘Abdallāh
 
To accomplish this, the critic would trace the different narrations of the various Successors
from the Companion in question, then the narrations from the next generation after the
Successor, et cetera, starting with the latest person in the isnād and working towards the
source to evaluate the quality of the isnād. The critic would ask: is each link reliable? Did
each link hear hadiths from their supposed source? If any narration from the Companion has a
fatal flaw, such as a seriously weak transmitter or a clear break in the isnād, then it would be
inadmissible as evidence. If a narration had a transmitter who was criticized for a lesser
failing such as occasional errors or a bad memory, the critic would keep this narration in mind
for consideration in comparison with the other narrations from the Companion or the
Successor.
 

 Figure 3.7 Hadith Prohibiting Putting on one’s Shoes while Standing: the Transmission of Ibn ‘Umar
 
If there were some disagreement in wording or form between the different versions of the
narration from the Companion, then the critic would use the various strengths and weaknesses
of the competing narrations, along with any data gleaned from weaker versions maintained for
consideration, to choose the most reliable version. This task would then be performed for the
next Companion’s transmission from the Prophet. Once one Companion’s hadith has been
verified, the hadith is considered sahīh or hasan depending on its strength. If, in addition to one
Companion’s hasan narration, another Companion’s narration was acceptable as well, then this
could raise the tradition as a whole to the level of sahīh.
Let us first examine the narration of Abū Hurayra (see Figure 3.4). We see that three
Successors supposedly narrated this hadith from Abū Hurayra: Abū Sālih, ‘Ammār b. Abī
‘Ammār and ‘Urwa b. ‘Alī al-Sahmī. We can immediately dismiss the narrations of ‘Ammār b.
Abī ‘Ammār and ‘Urwa b. ‘Alī al-Sahmī, for al-Tirmidhī and al-Bukhārī agree that the former
is weak because of the presence in its isnād of al-Hārith b. Nubhān, who critics agree was
unreliable. The narration of ‘Urwa b. ‘Alī is similarly baseless, for al-Bukhārī says it enjoys
no corroboration, and there are two unknown transmitters in the isnād.
This leaves us with the narration of Abū Sālih from Abū Hurayra. Here, however, we find
disagreement among the two narrations from Abū Sālih’s isnād. The version that Ibn Abī

 Shayba recorded from Abū Mu‘āwiya in his Musannaf is not a Prophetic hadith at all, but
rather the opinion of Abū Hurayra. The version that Ibn Mājah recorded from his teacher ‘Alī
b. Muhammad, from Abū Mu‘āwiya, however, is a Prophetic hadith. Which version is correct?
Both Ibn Abī Shayba and ‘Alī b. Muhammad are respected and reliable hadith scholars; is
there any way to judge whose version should be taken?
Ibn Abī Shayba was one of the most prominent hadith transmitters of his generation, while
‘Alī b. Muhammad served only as a source for hadith collectors in the northern Iranian cities
of Rayy and the Qazvin, where he became an important source for Ibn Mājah. Although the
rigorous critic Abū Hātim al-Rāzī, who studied with both Ibn Abī Shayba and ‘Alī b.
Muhammad, felt that ‘Alī was more reliable for hadiths concerning the virtues of actions and
righteous behavior, Ibn Abī Shayba was in general in command of more hadiths and possessed
of a better understanding of his craft. Because the hadith of putting on one’s shoes is a legal
issue, Abū Hātim’s testimony would lead us to incline towards Ibn Abī Shayba’s mawqūf
(Companion) version of the report. More important, however, is the conclusion of the great
critic al-Dāraqutnī, who introduces another Companion version of the report narrated from al-
A‘mash by Ibrāhīm al-Ru’āsī. Since it is the Companion version that enjoys corroboration and
the preponderance of evidence, al-Dāraqutnī concludes that the hadith is really the opinion of
Abū Hurayra and not a Prophetic hadith.
Turning to the narration of the hadith from the Prophet by Anas b. Mālik (see Figure 3.5),
found in al-Tirmidhī’s Jāmi‘ and the Musnad of Abū Ya‘lā al-Mawsilī, we see that al-Tirmidhī
and al-Bukhārī categorically state that this narration by Ma‘mar from Qatāda has no basis
(asl). Al-Tirmidhī does not even think the narration is worthwhile enough to inform us of his
immediate source for this particular version. In the case of Abū Ya‘lā’s narration, it seems
probable that Sulaymān b. ‘Ubaydallāh, deemed weak by many critics, erred in his narration
from his father and turned a Successor opinion transmitted by Ma‘mar into a Prophetic hadith.
The transmission of the report from Jābir b. ‘Abdallāh is also not admissible as proof of the
hadith’s reliability (see Figure 3.6). The hadith was transmitted from Jābir by Abū al-Zubayr
al-Makkī, who did not hear all the sahīfa of Jābir from him through direct transmission. This
means that, unless Abū al-Zubayr explicitly states that he heard this hadith aurally from Jābir,
there is too much chance that Abū al-Zubayr could commit an error in his reception of the
report for his testimony to be reliable.
Of the three versions we have examined so far, one has turned out to be a Companion opinion
in reality and two are unreliable. This is not the case, however, for the hadith narrated by the
Companion Ibn ‘Umar in Ibn Mājah’s Sunan (see Figure 3.7). The isnād of this narration seems
to be extremely strong – all its transmitters were highly respected, and there are no evident
breaks in the isnād. So far the first two steps of the three-tiered hadith critical method (Is there
an isnād? Who is in the isnād?) have proceeded successfully.
But there seems to be no corroboration for this transmission. This seems very odd in light of
how famous the scholars in the isnād were and how prolifically they transmitted hadiths. It
seems very unlikely that only one person would transmit this from Sufyān al-Thawrī, who was
the most sought-after scholar of his day. It is equally bizarre that only one person would

 transmit this hadith from Wakī‘, who was another pillar of hadith transmission.
Should this lack of corroboration from scholars who, it would seem, should have students
spreading this hadith far and wide, lead us to doubt the reliability of this report from Ibn
‘Umar? The nature of these transmitters’ relationships with one another lessens our worries.
Wakī‘ was the leading disciple of Sufyān, so much so that he was called ‘The Transmitter of
Sufyān (rāwiyat Sufyān),’ and when Sufyān died Wakī‘ took up his place teaching in the
mosque. Although ‘Alī b. Muhammad was not as famous as these two earlier generations, he
was in Kufa for many years with Wakī‘ and did not emigrate from the city to his new home in
Qazvin until after Wakī‘’s death. None of the transmitters in the isnād, then, were students who
studied only briefly with their sources for the hadith; all were long-term students or senior
disciples, so it is not surprising that they might have heard some hadiths from their teachers that
other students who had less exposure to them did not. The report from Ibn ‘Umar thus seems
reliable. Its lack of corroboration may cause us enough concern, however, to deem it hasan
instead of sahīh.
This is, in fact, how many later hadith critics judged this hadith. Al-Nawawī and al-‘Irāqī
called it hasan. Al-‘Irāqī’s student, the famous Ibn Hajar, notes that while some of the
transmissions of the report are weak the tradition is ‘established (ma‘rūf).’ Al-Būsīrī states
that the hadith is sahīh based mainly on the transmission of Ibn ‘Umar in the Sunan of Ibn
Mājah. The modern hadith scholars al-Albānī and Khaldūn al-Ahdab also deem the hadith
authentic.
HADITH CRITICISM CASE STUDY TWO: CONDEMNING BELIEF IN FREE WILL
This case study deals with a much more controversial topic: do human beings have free will or
has God preordained their actions? Some Muslim schools of theology, such as the Mu‘tazila,
affirmed free will because they insisted that God was totally just (how could He punish people
for deeds He ordained for them?). For Sunni Islam, however, the question was more one of
power than justice. Sunni theologians wanted to protect the notion of God’s power (qadar),
namely His power to know eternally what all human actions would be. If humans were free to
choose, they thought, this would give humans power beyond God’s knowledge. Sunni scholars
thus insisted that God predestined a person’s fate in the womb. How this could be reconciled
with the justice of God punishing the bad and rewarding the good in the afterlife was a divine
mystery beyond human ken.
The two traditions discussed here address the early Islamic school of thought that believed in
free will, referred to by Sunnis as the Qadariyya (or Qadarites). One hadith refers to them as
Zoroastrians (majūs) because Zoroastrians believe in two deities, a benevolent creator god
and a god of darkness. For Sunnis, believing that humans possessed a power beyond the
control of God was tantamount to elevating them to godlike status; hence, a second god. The
second group referred to in one of the hadiths, the Murji’a, was a school of thought that
believed in suspending judgment about people’s fate in the afterlife.
Chapters condemning the Qadarites were commonplace in the Sunni hadith collections of the
ninth and tenth centuries, and a huge number of elaborate hadiths were forged denigrating that

 theological position. Here we will examine two of the more reliable (from a Sunni
perspective) hadiths on the subject. They are instructive because they illustrate well the
difference between the criticism of narrations and those of the traditions they constitute. We
also see how later critics could take advantage of this distinction in their rulings on
authenticity. As we shall see, all but two of the following narrations were declared decidedly
‘weak’ or even forged by hadith critics in the early period, and even the one narration that
might rise to the level of hasan still suffered from serious flaws. Early critics like al-Bukhārī,
Ibn ‘Adī, and al-‘Uqaylī (d. 323/934) pointed out the flaws in these individual narrations,
assuming their learned audience would know that such errors had no bearing on other
narrations of the same traditions. When the twelfth-century scholar Ibn al-Jawzī wrote his
influential collection identifying forged hadiths, however, he declared both the traditions
examined here to be forged altogether.
 

 Figure 3.8a Hadith 1 on the Qadarite Heresy: ‘Two types…’ – the Narration of Ibn ‘Abbās
 
The first hadith is the Prophet’s statement ‘Two types from my community have no share in
Islam: the Murji’ites and the Qadarites,’ with some narrations including variations such as the

 phrase that these two groups ‘will not gain my intercession.’ As Figure 3.8a illustrates, a main
narration of this tradition comes through the Companion Ibn ‘Abbās via his student ‘Ikrima.
This narration is only transmitted from ‘Ikrima by Nizār and Sallām, both of whom are harshly
criticized by a wide range of hadith critics. Moreover, the individual narrations from
transmitters like ‘Abdallāh al-Laythī have each been identified as unacceptable (munkar), due
to a lack of corroboration, or declared false by early critics such as Ibn ‘Adī and al-‘Uqaylī.
As a result of all this, the tradition from Ibn ‘Abbās has uniformly been declared weak by
scholars such as al-Khatīb al-Baghdādī, al-‘Alā’ī, Ibn Hajar, al-Suyūtī, al-Albānī, and others.
 

 Figure 3.8b Hadith 1 on the Qadarite Heresy: Sundry Narrations
 

 As Figure 3.8b shows, there were other narrations of this ‘Two types…’ tradition as well.
Like the version through Ibn ‘Abbās, all these narrations were declared unreliable by Muslim
scholars at various times. For several of the narrations, we see the problem of a lack of
corroboration. This raised suspicions because it might be an instance of a sinister forger
‘stealing’ an isnād from an existing hadith and attaching it to a concocted matn. Or it might be
the result of a careless transmitter accidentally creating a whole new, baseless transmission for
a hadith. Looking at each narration from left to right on the chart, we see:
 
• The narrations from the Companion Anas b. Mālik found in the Hilyat al-awliyā’ (Ornament
of the Saints) of Abū Nu‘aym al-Isbahānī (d. 430/1038) and the Ibāna al-kubrā (Greater
Clarification) of the Hanbalī theologian Ibn Batta (d. 387/997) each depend on transmitters
who are either wholly unidentified or whose reliability is unknown (majhūl al-hāl).
• The narration through Anas 
 Humayd in the Mu‘jam al-awsat of al-Tabarānī comes via
transmitters who are all reliable, according to al-Haythamī. But they are not common
transmitters from one another, and al-Tabarānī himself boasts of how no one besides Abū
Damra Anas b. ‘Iyād narrated this from Humayd, and no one besides Hārūn narrated it from
Abū Damra. Because of the total lack of corroboration from this transmission, Ibn ‘Adī calls
this narration ‘unknown (munkar).’
• The two narrations from the Companion Jābir b. ‘Abdallāh are also both found in al-
Tabarānī’s Mu‘jam. Bahr al-Saqqā’ was so incredibly unreliable that one early critic
recalled that, after he had written down some hadiths from Bahr, a cat, sensing the value of
the material, came and urinated on the pages. As for the narration via Sahl b. Qarīn, al-
Tabarānī boasts that only Sahl narrated this from his father, from the famous jurist Ibn Abī
Dhi’b. But, as Ibn ‘Adī notes, this narration is a gross error on the part of Sahl.
• The narration via the Kufan jurist Ibn Abī Laylā 
 ‘Amr b. Qāsim, also in al-Tabarānī’s
Mu‘jam al-awsat, is unreliable because ‘Amr was known for lacking corroboration for his
narrations.
• The narration from Ibn Abī Laylā that is found in the Kitāb al-sunna of Ibn Abī ‘Āsim (d.
287/900) is an isolated narration and relies on a weak transmitter, Sulaymān b. Ja‘far.
 
The second tradition regarding Qadarites quotes the Prophet as saying, ‘The Qadarites/those
who deny God’s power (qadar) are the Zoroastrians of my nation ….’ Although al-‘Uqaylī
noted that all its narrations are via weak transmitters, some were reliable enough to earn the
tradition an overall rating of sahīh from al-Hākim al-Naysābūrī and hasan from al-Albānī.
Looking at Figure 3.9, from left to right, we see:
 
• The most reliable narration is found in the Sunan of Ibn Mājah and comes from the
Companion Jābir b. ‘Abdallāh, via a chain of strong transmitters, until Baqiyya b. al-Walīd.
Although Ibn ‘Adī noted that Baqiyya would often narrate from Ibn Jurayj via unmentioned
intermediaries – a major violation – in this case he names as his intermediary the leading
jurist and hadith transmitter of Syria, al-Awzā‘ī.

 • The narrations from Ibn ‘Umar via Salama b. Dīnār (Abū Hāzim) 
 Zakariyyā b. Yahyā b.
Manzūr, found in the Mu‘jam al-awsat of al-Tabarānī and the Kitāb al-sunna of Ibn Abī
‘Āsim, are dismissed as unreliable because al-Bukhārī, Ibn Ma‘īn, al-Nasā’ī, and others said
Zakariyyā was very weak.
     Moreover, as Ibn ‘Adī notes, only Zakariyyā’s narration from Salama includes Salama
specifying that he heard the hadith from Nāfi‘. This is important, since Ibn Hajar states that it
is largely agreed upon that Salama did not hear directly from the Companion Ibn ‘Umar. If the
narration from Nāfi‘ 
 Salama is unreliable, then the only remaining narrations from
Salama come through Ibn ‘Umar 
 Salama, which includes a break in the isnād. Some
critics, such as al-Hākim al-Naysābūrī and Ibn al-Qattān of Fez (d. 628/1230), considered
this narration sahīh provided (and this is a big provided!) that Salama had heard hadiths
directly from Ibn ‘Umar.
 

 Figure 3.9 Hadith 2 on the Qadarite Heresy: ‘The Zoroastrians of my nation ...’

  
• The narrations from Ibn ‘Umar via ‘Umar b. ‘Abdallāh, the freeman of Ghufra, appear in
works like the Sunan of Abū Dāwud and the Musnad of his teacher Ibn Hanbal. ‘Umar the
freeman of Ghufra was a moderately respected transmitter whose main fault was frequent
mursal narrations, i.e., quoting a Companion without specifying that he heard the hadith from
an intermediary (as in the case of one narration in the Musnad of Ibn Hanbal). This is
compensated for by his specifying in another narration in the Musnad that he heard the hadith
from Ibn ‘Umar 
 Nāfi‘. But, as Ibn ‘Adī and al-Albānī point out, the lack of clarity
constitutes a flaw (‘illa) in the narration.
• There is also a narration through ‘Umar of Ghufra via an unnamed man from the Medinan
Ansār, from the Companion Hudhayfa b. Yamān, found in the Sunan of Abū Dāwūd and Ibn
Hanbal’s Musnad. It includes an additional clause in the matn: ‘… and they are the party of
the Antichrist, and it befits God to join them with him.’ This narration is unreliable because
of the unidentified transmitter.
• One narration via Nāfi‘ bypasses the problem of ‘Umar of Ghufra. According to al-Bukhārī
and Ibn ‘Adī, however, it is fatally flawed (munkar) because it is known only through the
unreliable al-Hakam b. Sa‘īd.
• Finally, the narrations of the hadith from the Companion Abū Hurayra are hopelessly tangled.
These are found in several works from the tenth century, but the earliest source for them is the
Kitāb al-qadar of Ja‘far al-Faryābī (d. 301/913) and the Kitāb al-sunna of Ibn Abī ‘Āsim
(narrations not shown). They all come through the Syrian Successor Makhūl. But one comes
through an unidentified ‘man,’ while the others have Makhūl citing Abū Hurayra, whom he
never met, and come through the problematic transmitter ‘Atā’ al-Khurāsānī. The one
narration that features Makhūl narrating from Abū Hurayra via an intermediary, the prominent
Successor of Mecca, Ibn Abī Rabāh, is known to us only via Maslama b. ‘Alī, who is
criticized for this uncorroborated narration.
Conclusion: Rating these Two Hadiths
With the exception of the narration of the ‘Qadariyya are the Zoroastrians…’ hadith from Jābir
in the Sunan of Ibn Mājah, every narration of these two traditions is either impugned for weak
transmitters, lack of corroboration, or both. Looking at these narrations as particulars, Ibn al-
Jawzī thus considered the two hadiths to be complete forgeries.
Most later scholars, however, defended the overall acceptability of our two hadiths.
Responding to what they thought was an extreme ruling by Ibn al-Jawzī, al-‘Alā’ī, Ibn Hajar,
al-Suyūtī, and most recently Ahmad al-Ghumārī and al-Albānī all defended these two hadiths.
They argued that most of the narrations are weak, but they do not merit the label of outright
forgeries. When they are aggregated, the hadiths even rise to the level of hasan. Several
scholars took a middle ground. Al-Munāwī labeled both hadiths as weak, and the Hanafī
scholar Ibn Abī al-‘Izz (d. 792/1390) declared simply that all hadiths on the Qadariyya are
weak.111

 SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
For further information on hadith criticism and its historical development, see Ignaz
Goldziher’s Muslim Studies II, Muhammad Siddiqi’s Hadith Literature (Cambridge, 1996),
Eerik Dickinson’s The Development of Early Sunnite H.adīth Criticism (Leiden, 2001), and
Jonathan Brown’s The Canonization of al-Bukhārī and Muslim (Leiden, 2007). For a work
specifically discussing the contributions of Sunni hadith critics, see Scott Lucas, Constructive
Critics, H.adīth Literature and the Articulation of Sunnī Islam (Leiden, 2004). See also
Brown, ‘Critical Rigor versus Juridical Pragmatism,’ Islamic Law and Society 14, no. 1
(2007), pp.1–41. For more depth on the issue of content/matn criticism of hadiths, see J.
Brown, ‘How We Know Early Hadith Critics Did Matn Criticism and Why It’s So Hard to
Find,’ Islamic Law and Society 15 (2008), pp.143–184 and the same author’s ‘The Rules of
Matn Criticism: There Are No Rules,’ Islamic Law and Society 19 (2012), pp. 356–396. For
more on how sure Muslims scholars were that the Prophet had said something and debates
over using hadiths scholars knew were unreliable, see the author’s ‘Did the Prophet Say It or
Not?: the Literal, Historical and Effective Truth of Hadiths in Sunni Islam,’ Journal of the
American Oriental Society, 129, no. 2 (2009), pp. 1–27; and ‘Even if it’s not True it’s True:
Using Unreliable Hadiths in Sunni Islam,’ Islamic Law and Society 18 (2011), pp. 1–52.
Two useful primary sources for the method of hadith criticism in the early period are G.H.A.
Juynboll’s ‘Muslim’s Introduction to His Sahih,’ republished in Studies on the Origins and
Uses of Islamic Hadīth (Variorum, 1996) and J. Brown’s translation of The Kitab al-‘Ilal of
Imam al-Tirmidhi (Madina Institute, 2018). Eerik Dickinson has translated one of the most
important Muslim texts on the technical terms of hadith study, the Muqaddima of Ibn al-Salāh,
into English under the title An Introduction to the Science of Hadith (Reading, UK, 2005).
James Robson has also translated an earlier and shorter manual on hadith criticism by al-
Hākim al-Naysābūrī entitled An Introduction to the Science of Tradition (London: Luzac &
Co., 1953). A recent example of traditional Muslim hadith criticism is Zafar Ahmad al-
Tahānawī’s (d. 1974) Qawa’id fi Ulum al-Hadith: Principles of the Sciences of Hadith
(London: Turath Publishing, 2014). A translation of a representative book of mawdū‘āt
(forged) hadiths is Mullā ‘Alī al-Qārī’s Encyclopedia of Hadith Forgeries, trans. G.F. Haddad
(Beacon Books, 2013). Ibn al-Jawzī’s fascinating book on storytellers, popular preachers, and
their abuse of hadiths has been translated into English by Merlin Swartz as Ibn al-Jawzī’s
Kitāb al-Qus.s.ās. wa’l-Mudhakkirīn (Beirut: Dar El-Machreq, 1986).
ENDNOTES
  1   Benjaminson and Anderson, Investigative Reporting, p. 30.
  2   ‘Pet food: too posh to eat pooch,’ The Economist, June 20, 2015.
  3   Al-Dhahabī, Mīzān al-i‘tidāl, vol. 2, p. 293.
  4   Ibid., vol. 3, p. 517.
  5   Cited from al-Madā’inī’s Kitāb al-ahdāth; Ahmad b. Sa‘d al-Dīn al-Miswarī, Al-Risāla al-munqidha min al-ghiwāya fī
turuq al-riwāya, pp. 51–55.
  6   ‘Abdallāh b. al-Zubayr al-Humaydī, Al-Musnad, vol. 1, p. 2.
  7   ‘Abd al-Razzāq al-San‘ānī, Musannaf, vol. 10, p. 381.
  8   Sahīh Muslim: kitāb al-janā’iz, bāb al-mayyit yu‘adhdhabu bi-bukā’ ahlihi ‘alayhi.

   9   Musnad Ibn Hanbal: vol. 6, p. 246.
 10   Abū Zur‘a al-Dimashqī, Tārīkh Abī Zur‘a al-Dimashqī, p. 270.
 11   For an example, see al-Dhahabī, Mīzān al-i‘tidāl, vol. 2, p. 369.
 12   Ismā‘īl b. Ahmad al-‘Ajlūnī, Kashf al-khafā’, vol. 1, p. 227.
 13   ‘Kuntu ‘ind al-nabī dhāt layla qāl: unzur hal tarā fī al-samā’ min shay’ ...’; Musnad Ibn Hanbal: vol. 1, p. 209.
 14   Al-Suyūtī, al-La’ālī’ al-masnū‘a fī al-ahādīth al-mawdū‘a, vol. 1, p. 357.
 15   Al-Rāfi‘ī, al-Tadwīn fī akhbār Qazwīn, vol. 1, p.452.
 16   Osama al-Syed Mahmoud, personal communication 2/06.
 17   Al-Suyūtī, al-La’ālī al-masnū‘a, vol. 1, p. 16; vol. 2, p. 221.
 18   Al-Khatīb, Tārīkh Baghdād, vol. 9, p. 334; vol. 2, p. 379.
 19  9 Mullā ‘Alī Qārī, al-Asrār al-marfū‘a fī al-akhbār al-mawdū‘a, p. 442.
 20   Ibid., p. 236; Ibn al-Jawzī, Kitāb al-mawdū‘āt, vol. 1, p. 41.
 21   Al-Dhahabī, Mīzān al-i‘tidāl, vol. 1, p. 187; Qādī ‘Iyād, Kitāb al-shifā, p. 226.
 22   Al-Hākim al-Naysābūrī, Kitāb al-madkhal ilā ma‘rifat kitāb al-iklīl, pp. 134–135.
 23   Ibn ‘Adī, al-Kāmil fī du‘afā’ al-rijāl, vol. 1, p. 151.
 24   Al-Dhahabī, Mīzān al-i‘tidāl, vol. 1, p. 141.
 25   Ibn al-Jawzī, Kitāb al-mawdū‘āt, vol. 1, p. 39.
 26   Ibn Hajar, Fath al-bārī, vol. 1, p. 266.
 27   Al-‘Ajlūnī, Kashf al-khafā’, vol. 1, pp. 412–413.
 28   Mullā ‘Alī Qārī, al-Masnū‘ fī ma‘rifat al-hadīth al-mawdū‘, p. 121.
 29   Al-‘Ajlūnī, Kashf al-khafā’, vol. 1, pp. 319–320; Ibn Abī Hātim al-Rāzī, ‘Ilal al-hadīth, vol. 2, p. 342.
 30   Sahīh Muslim: muqaddima, bāb al-isnād min al-dīn.
 31   Al-Albānī, Silsilat al-ahādīth al-da‘īfa wa al-mawdū‘a, vol. 1, p. 53.
 32  2 Jonathan Brown, ‘How We Know Early H.adīth Critics Did Matn Criticism,’ pp. 170–171.
 33   Sahīh Muslim: muqaddima, bāb al-isnād min al-dīn.
 34   Al-Hākim, Kitāb al-madkhal ilā ma‘rifat kitāb al-iklīl, p. 58.
 35   Lucas, Constructive Critics, pp. 143–156.
 36   Abū Ghudda, ed., Arba‘ rasā’il fī ‘ulūm al-hadīth, p. 180.
 37   Abū Ja‘far al-‘Uqaylī, Kitāb al-du‘afā’ al-kabīr, vol. 1, p. 13.
 38   Sahīh Muslim: muqaddima, introduction.
 39   Al-‘Uqaylī, Kitāb al-du‘afā’ al-kabīr, vol. 1, p. 13.
 40   Al-Khatīb, Tārīkh Baghdād, vol. 10, p. 260.
 41   Al-Dhahabī, Mīzān al-i‘tidāl, vol. 1, pp. 218 ff.
 42   Muhammad Ibn al-Amīr al-San‘ānī, [Question and Answer], 38b.
 43   Muhammad b. ‘Aqīl, al-‘Atb al-jamīl ‘alā ahl al-jarh wa al-ta‘dīl, p. 92.
 44   Al-Dhahabī, Mīzān al-i‘tidāl, vol. 2, p. 205.
 45   Ibn Abī Hātim, al-Jarh wa al-ta‘dīl, vol. 2, p. 37.
 46   Al-Mundhirī, Jawāb al-hāfiz al-Mundhirī, p. 89.
 47   Al-Dhahabī, Mīzān al-i‘tidāl,vol. 4, p. 237.
 48   Al-‘Irāqī, al-Taqyīd wa al-īdāh, p. 231.
 49   Sahīh al-Bukhārī: kitāb fadā’il al-sahāba, bāb 1.
 50   Al-Khatīb, al-Kifāya, vol. 1, p. 188.
 51   Ibn Taymiyya, Majmū‘at al-fatāwā, vol. 27, p. 223.
 52   ‘Alī Jum‘a, personal communication, 8/27/03.
 53   Jum‘a, Qawl al-sahābī ‘ind al-usūliyyīn, p. 34.
 54   For example, the Prophet’s stepson Hind b. Abī Hāla; al-Bukhārī, Kitāb al-du‘afā’ al-saghīr, p. 123.
 55   Abū Ghudda, Arba‘ rasā’il fī ‘ulūm al-hadīth, pp. 111, 207; J. Brown, ‘Crossing Sectarian Boundaries in the 4th/10th
Century,’ pp. 55–58.
 56   Abū Zur‘a al-Dimashqī, Tārīkh Abī Zur‘a al-Dimashqī, p. 93.
 57   Ibn Abī Hātim al-Rāzī, al-Taqdima, p. 127.
 58   Salāh al-Dīn al-‘Alā’ī, Jāmi‘ al-tahsīl fī ahkām al-marāsīl, p. 80.
 59   Jāmi‘ al-Tirmidhī: kitāb al-‘ilal, bāb al-mursal.
 60   Ibn Hibbān al-Bustī, Sahīh Ibn Hibbān, vol. 1, pp. 144–145.
 61   Sahīh Muslim: muqaddima, introduction.
 62   Al-Dhahabī, Mīzān al-i‘tidāl, vol. 2, pp. 440–441.

  63   Sahīh Muslim: muqaddima, introduction.
 64   Jāmi‘ al-Tirmidhī: kitāb al-jihād, bāb mā jā’a fī al-mighfar.
 65   Jāmi‘ al-Tirmidhī: kitāb al-‘ilal; kitāb al-birr wa al-sila, bāb mā jā’a fī adab al-walad.
 66   Al-Khalīlī, Al-Irshād, p. 21.
 67   J. Brown, ‘Critical Rigor versus Juridical Pragmatism,’ p. 21 ; ‘Alī b. ‘Umar al-Dāraqutnī, Kitāb al-ilzāmāt wa’l-tatabbu‘,
ed. Muqbil al-Wādi‘ī (Medina, al-Maktaba al-Salafiyya, [1978]), pp. 266–7.
 68   J. Brown, ‘Critical Rigor,’ pp. 38–41.
 69   Badī‘ al-Sayyid al-Lahhām, al-Imām al-hāfiz Jalāl al-Dīn al-Suyūtī, pp. 460–463.
 70   Al-Dhahabī, Mīzān al-i‘tidāl, vol. 3, p. 306.
 71   Al-Bukhārī, al-Tārīkh al-awsat, vol. 2, pp. 109–110.
 72   Muslim, Kitāb al-tamyīz, p. 147.
 73   Ibn al-Murtadā, Tabaqāt al-mu‘tazila, p. 81.
 74   This is attributed to ‘Alī b. al-Madīnī; Ibn ‘Adī, Al-Kāmil, vol. 1, p. 131.
 75   Sunan al-Nasā’ī: kitāb al-janā’iz, bāb al-niyāha ‘alā al-mayyit.
 76   Ibn Qutayba, Ta’wīl mukhtalif al-hadīth, p. 208.
 77   Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr, Kitāb al-tamhīd, vol. 1, p. 58.
 78   Jāmi‘ al-Tirmidhī: kitāb al-‘ilal.
 79   Al-Dhahabī, Mīzān al-i‘tidāl, vol. 1, p. 119.
 80   Al-Husayn b. Ibrāhīm al-Jawzaqānī, al-Abātīl wa al-manākīr, pp. 89–90.
 81   Ibn al-Jawzī, Kitāb al-mawdū‘āt, vol. 1, p. 106.
 82   J. Brown, ‘The Rules of Matn Criticism,’ pp. 364, 376–80.
 83   Ibn Khuzayma, Sahīh Ibn Khuzayma, vol. 1, p. 3.
 84   Ibn Hajar, al-Nukat ‘alā kitāb Ibn al-Salāh, p. 134.
 85   Ibn Taymiyya, Majmū‘at al-fatāwā,vol. 18, p. 23.
 86   Jāmi‘ al-Tirmidhī: kitāb al-‘ilal.
 87   Hamd al-Khattābī, Ma‘ālim al-sunan, vol. 1, p. 6.
 88   Ibn Abī Hātim, al-Jarh wa al- ta‘dīl, vol. 2, pp. 30–31.
 89   Al-Khatīb, al-Kifāya fī ma‘rifat usūl ‘ilm al-riwāya, vol. 1, p. 399.
 90   Al-Khatīb, al-Jāmi‘, vol. 2, p. 195.
 91   J. Brown, ‘The Rules of Matn Criticism,’ pp. 362–64
 92   Abū Bakr al-Jassās, Usūl al-Jassās, vol. 1, pp. 504 ff., 2, pp. 3–6, 14.
 93   Ibn al-Salāh, Muqaddima, p. 454.
 94   Ibn Hibbān, Sahīh Ibn Hibbān, vol. 1, p. 145.
 95   Jamāl al-Dīn al-Zayla‘ī, Nasb al-rāya li-ahādīth al-Hidāya, vol. 1, p. 342.
 96   Al-Dhahabī, Siyar a‘lām al-nubalā’, vol. 17, p. 175.
 97   Al-Nawawī, al-Adhkār, p. 214.
 98   Ibn Taymiyya, Majmū‘at al-fatāwā, vol. 19, p. 144.
 99   Al-Nawawī, Sharh Sahīh Muslim, vol. 1, p. 240; al-Suyūtī, ‘al-Ta‘zīm wa al-manna fī anna abawayh rasūl Allāh fī al-
janna,’ p. 2.
100  Mullā ‘Alī Qārī, Al-Asrār al-marfū‘a, p. 305.
101  Al-‘Ajlūnī, Kashf al-khafā’, vol. 1, pp. 236–237.
102  Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya, Kitāb al-rūh, p. 32.
103  Mālik, al-Muwatta’: kitāb mā jā’a fī al-ru’ā.
104  Sunan Ibn Mājah: kitāb ta‘bīr al-ru’ā, bāb ru’yat al-nabī.
105  See ‘Abd al-Rā’ūf al-Munāwī, Fayd al-qadīr sharh al-Jāmi‘ al-saghīr, vol. 11, pp. 5805–6.
106  Al-Rāfi‘ī, al-Tadwīn fī akhbār Qazwīn, vol. 1, p. 309.
107  William Chittick, Imaginal Worlds, p. 10.
108  Chittick, The Sufi Path of Knowledge, pp. 251–252.
109  John Voll, ‘Two Biographies of Ahmad Ibn Idris al-Fasi (1760–1837),’ p. 641.
110  Mullā ‘Alī Qārī, Al-Masnū‘, p. 216. See also, al-Sakhāwī, Maqāsid, p. 424.
111  Ibn al-Jawzī, Kitāb al-Mawdū‘āt, vol. 1, pp. 275–278; Ibn Abī al-‘Izz, Sharh al-‘Aqīda al-Tahāwiyya, p. 273; Ibn Hajar,
Hidāyat al-ruwāt, vol. 1, p. 102; al-Suyūtī, al-La’ālī al-masnū‘a, vol. 1, pp. 236–240; al-Munāwī, Fayd al-qadīr, vol. 7, p.
3743, vol. 8, p. 4398; Ahmad al-Ghumārī, al-Mudāwī, vol. 4, p. 638; al-Albānī, Da‘īf Sunan Ibn Mājah, p. 11, idem,
Silsilat al-ahādīth al-da‘īfa, vol. 12, pp. 481–482.
 

 *  The early scholar al-Dārimī (d. 255/869) interpreted ‘Umar’s command ‘Be frugal in narrating from the Prophet’ to apply
only to reports about his battles, not to hadiths about law and belief; Sunan al-Dārimī: intro chapters, bāb man hāba al-futyā.

 4
PROPHETIC TRADITIONS IN SHIITE ISLAM
INTRODUCTION
Muhammad’s authority to interpret definitively the meaning of the Quran and instruct Muslims
did not disappear when he died. It continued in the form of an inheritance left to the Muslim
community. To a large extent, sectarian divisions in Islam have revolved around competing
claims over who should assume this role of authoritative interpreter. The tradition that became
Sunni Islam offered one answer: the community as a whole, represented by the ulema (the
Muslim scholarly class), was heir to Muhammad. Their collective interpretation of Islam,
expressed through consensus (ijmā’), was as definitive as the Quran or the Prophet’s edicts.
The tradition that would become Shiite Islam proposed a different answer: the family of the
Prophet had inherited his authority, which was held by select members of the family known as
imams. The first imam was ‘Alī b. Abī Tālib (d. 40/660), Muhammad’s cousin and the
husband of his daughter Fatima, through whom all descendants of the Prophet trace their
ancestry. Shiites maintain that the Prophet had imparted his knowledge to ‘Alī, and through ‘Alī
to his descendants. When one of these revered descendants, Mūsā al-Kāzim (d. 183/799), was
asked if the Prophet had brought mankind all the knowledge they would require to understand
their religion and if any of that had been lost, he replied, ‘No, it is with his family.’1 Mūsā’s
father, Ja‘far al-Sādiq (d. 148/765), had given the same answer. The Quran contains the
answers to all questions, he said, ‘but men’s minds cannot grasp them.’ For an imam in whose
veins the Prophet’s esoteric knowledge of God’s will runs, however, he can see these answers
in the Quran ‘as easily as he looks at his own palm.’2
Hadiths were one medium for transmitting the Prophet’s legacy through the generations of his
community as they expanded outwards from Medina in time and space. Since Shiism had a
different vision of the heirs to the Prophet’s authority, it is no surprise that the Shiite hadith
tradition differs greatly from its Sunni counterpart. As the majority of the world’s Shiites
subscribe to the Imami, or Ithna‘asharī (‘Twelver,’ so called because it traces the Prophetic
authority through twelve imams) creed, and since Imami hadith scholarship has dwarfed that of
other Shiite sects, in this chapter we will focus mainly on the Imami Shiite hadith tradition. We
will then turn our attention briefly to Zaydi Shiite hadith scholarship. As in the previous
chapters, mention of ‘authentic’ or ‘forged’ hadiths refers to Muslim standards for reliability,
not Western historical ones.
In Sunni Islam, hadiths were reports transmitted from the only individual that Sunnis deemed
infallible: the Prophet Muhammad. In Imami Shiite Islam, the infallibility of the Prophet lived
on in the form of the imams, each one appointing one of his sons as the next imam. Not only
were these imams therefore the best source for sayings of the Prophet, they themselves were
sources of their own hadiths. The vast majority of Imami Shiite hadiths thus occur in one of
three forms:

  
1 A hadith of the Prophet is transmitted through an isnād made up of the imams after him.
2 The saying of an imam is transmitted from him by later imams.
3 The saying of an imam is transmitted from him via an isnād of his followers.
 
Figure 4.0 The Twelve Imams
 

 Figure 4.1 Forms of Imami Shiite Hadiths
 
Whether a hadith originated with the Prophet or an imam, or whether or not the isnād between
an imam and the Prophet was complete was of no importance. After all, imams were infallible
and spoke with the inherited authority of the Prophet. A famous Shiite hadith makes this amply
clear. The sixth imam, Ja‘far al-Sādiq, is reported to have said:
 
My hadiths are the hadiths of my father, and the hadiths of my father are the hadiths of my grandfather, and the hadiths of
my grandfather are the hadiths of al-Husayn, and the hadiths of al-Husayn are the hadiths of al-Hasan, and the hadiths of
al-Hasan are the hadiths of the Commander of the Faithful (‘Alī b. Abī Tālib) (s), and the hadiths of the Commander of the
Faithful are the hadiths of the Messenger of God (s), and the hadiths of the Messenger of God are the words of God most
high.3
 
Shiites also sometimes narrated hadiths from the Prophet via his Companions in the same
manner as Sunnis. But as we will discuss below, this was generally done for polemical
purposes. There was little reason for Shiites to rely on the all-too-fallible Companions of the
Prophet when they believed that the imams who descended from him were immune to
deception or misguidance.
THE DEVELOPMENT OF EARLY SHIITE HADITH LITERATURE

 Three major events defined the Imami Shiite community and had a formative influence on its
hadith tradition. First, the failure of the early Muslims to acknowledge collectively that ‘Alī
and his descendants should have been the rightful political and religious rulers in Islam made
the idealistic Sunni vision of the early Muslim community untenable. Unlike the categorical
trust that Sunnis placed in the reliability of the Companions as hadith transmitters, Shiites
believed that even this founding generation had failed. Any Companion who did not support
‘Alī’s claim to succeed the Prophet was at best complicit with injustice, at worst an active
denier of the truth.
Second, for the Imami Shiites, like other Shiite groups who identified religious leadership
with the Prophet’s descendants, this reliance on the family of the Prophet resulted in a crisis
when the line of imams seemed to come to an end. In 260/874, Hasan al-‘Askarī, the eleventh
imam, died in captivity in the Abbasid court. A young man, he had no heir that the public knew
of. The Shiite imams had served as the authoritative interpreters of the Quran, the Prophet’s
legacy, and Islam in general for their followers. Who now would meet this need? Some
members of the Shiite community claimed that the eleventh imam had indeed had a son, who
had been hidden away by the community from the Abbasid caliph. Tired of the unjust and
iniquitous world, the infant boy had vanished in an underground cave in Samarra, to return in
the future as the rightly guided Messiah (Mahdī) and ‘fill the world with justice as it had been
filled with injustice.’ In the coming decades, certain members of the community claimed to be
in contact with the ‘Hidden Imam,’ even delivering questions posed by members of the
community to him. Eventually the prominent Shiite noble Ibn Rawh al-Nawbakhtī formalized
this function, announcing that he and two predecessors were ‘ambassadors (safīr)’ of the
Hidden Imam.4
In 329/941 the third formative event occurred: the last of the ‘ambassadors’ died. This
controversial office, claimed disputably by many, proved too problematic to both the Hidden
Imam and his community, and all contact between the two would be cut off until the Imam’s
return. The last ‘ambassador’ informed his followers soon before his death that the Hidden
Imam had instructed him that anyone from that point on who claimed contact with the Imam was
a fraud.5 The Shiite community, who had held that God would not leave His community without
an authoritative interpreter of His religion, found itself completely alone. This duty would now
fall upon the shoulders of the scholars. Although not in contact with him, they would act as the
Hidden Imam’s regents until his return.
It is in this period of crisis, beginning with the initial disappearance of the twelfth imam and
reaching a crescendo with his ultimate occultation (passing into a state of supernatural
seclusion), that we find the earliest development of Imami Shiite doctrine and hadith. First, the
Imami community, with its centers at Qumm and Rayy in Iran, would have to distinguish itself
from other Shiite groups who believed that it was in fact earlier imams who had represented
the end of the earthly Alid line and would return as the awaited Mahdī. Hasan b. Mūsā al-
Nawbakhtī’s (d. between 300–310/912–922) and Sa‘d b. Abdallāh al-Qummī’s (writing
292/905) ninth-century books on various sects of the Shiites are the first surviving articulations
of Imami doctrine. These books seek to carve out a doctrinal identity for the Imami Shiites that

 distinguishes them from both the earlier Shiite extremist groups, such as those that believed that
‘Alī was divine, as well as the groups such as the Ismailis (many of whom awaited the return
of the imam Ismā‘īl, the brother of the seventh imam Mūsā al-Kāzim, whom they claimed was
in occultation) and the Waqifiyya sect, who believed that it was Mūsā al-Kāzim who had gone
into occultation.
Furthermore, who was this twelfth ‘Hidden’ imam, unknown to all but a few prominent
Shiites, and what was the nature of his occultation? Even many of the Shiite families who had
believed in the imamate of the Hidden Imam’s father al-Hasan al-‘Askarī did not know the
answer to these questions. The scion of a great Shiite family of Qumm, Ibn Bābawayh (d.
381/991), attempted to clarify these points to his community in his Epistle on Beliefs, which
comprehensively formulated the doctrine of Imamis.6
What heritage did Imami Shiite scholars like Ibn Bābawayh have to draw on in their efforts
to define Imami law and doctrine? Like many pious Muslims in the first three generations of
Islam, those individuals who believed that the family of the Prophet enjoyed a special status or
religious authority collected the sayings and rulings of the imams in order to preserve their
legacy. In particular, the students who flocked around the sixth imam, Ja‘far al-Sādiq (The
Truthful), in Medina collected their notes of his teachings. The legacy of his son, the seventh
imam, Mūsā al-Kāzim, was also collected in numerous small books by his students. Even until
the time of the eleventh imam, devotees of the family of the Prophet labored to record their
teachings, rulings, and interpretations of the Quran.7
A notebook of sayings of imams like Ja‘far al-Sādiq was called an asl (‘source,’ pl. usūl).
Hundreds (Imami Shiites have traditionally talked of the ‘four hundred usūl,’ but other numbers
have been mentioned as well) of these usūl were compiled, sometimes by a student of the imam
recording his teachings directly and sometimes through an isnād from the imam to a slightly
later collector. The usūl contained the material essential for formulating a religious and
communal vision: elaborations of doctrine, answers to legal queries and polemics against
those who opposed the rightful station of the ahl al-bayt (The Family of the Prophet).
In addition, early Shiite compilers collected books on the virtues (fadā’il, khasā’is) of ‘Alī
and his progeny as well as the history of their careers. Zayd b. Wahb (d. 96/714–15), a Kufan
devotee of the family of the Prophet, compiled a book of the sermons of ‘Alī (Kitāb khutab
amīr al-mu’minīn).8
Like the Sunni hadith tradition, some of these early books may really have been written after
the deaths of their supposed authors by some later figure. Even some Shiite scholars, for
example, doubt the authenticity of a book of hadiths attributed to the Successor Sulaym b. Qays
al-‘Āmirī called Kitāb al-saqīfa.9 Some of the usūl drew on these dubious early books, like the
‘Book of the Sunna, Rulings and Judicial Cases’ (Kitāb al-sunan wa al-ahkām wa al-qadāyā)
of the Companion Ibrāhīm Abū Rāfi‘ and al-Sahīfa al-sajjādiyya attributed to the fourth imam,
‘Alī Zayn al-‘Ābidīn.10 These early books may have really existed, or they may have been
conjured up by later Shiites eager to show that ‘Alī and his descendants truly had some special
knowledge, in book form, that no other Companions possessed.
For the Imami community, eager to elaborate a clear doctrine, ritual, and law in the absence

 of its imam, however, these usūl were not very useful. They needed to be reorganized
according to topic. Starting in the early eighth century, Shiite scholars began making selections
of hadiths and organizing them into ‘compendia’ (jāmi‘, pl. jawāmi‘) and ‘topical books’
(mubawwab). These books could either address one issue or, like the musannaf and sunan
books of the Sunnis, a whole range of subjects. For example, Ja‘far al-Sādiq’s student Ghiyāth
b. Ibrāhīm had compiled a book of the imam’s teachings organized along the lines of what was
permitted or forbidden for various legal topics.11 Ibn al-Qaddāh (d. c. 180/796–7) collected a
book of hadiths specifically on the nature of heaven and hell.12
These early topical collections by students of the imams provided a foundation for the Imami
Shiite community to draw from and build on. Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Saffār al-Qummī (d.
290/903) wrote the famous Basā’ir al-darajāt, which specifically dealt with the virtues and
prerogatives of imams.13 Ibn Bābawayh’s Kitāb al-jāmi‘ li-ziyārat al-Ridā provided reports
on the virtues of the eighth imam and the importance of visiting his grave, while the Kitāb al-
jāmi‘ al-kabīr fī al-fiqh by Ibrāhīm b. Muhammad al-Thaqafī (d. 283/896) more closely
resembled a comprehensive sunan book.14 A tafsīr replete with reports about why verses of the
Quran were revealed was attributed to the eleventh imam al-Hasan al-‘Askarī (although Shiite
scholars debate whether or not the imam actually wrote it).
Even as the usūl and early books were broken up to create these topical works, some Shiite
scholars like Ahmad Ibn ‘Uqda (d. 332/944), who were deeply committed to hadith
transmission, continued to transmit the usūl in their original form – approximately thirteen
survive today.15 It is interesting that, as Ron Buckley has noted, Shiites started compiling
topical collections of hadiths as part of developing their law at approximately the same time
that great Sunni scholars such as Mālik b. Anas and al-Bukhārī were doing the same.16
THE SHIITE HADITH CANON
These topical works of law, ritual, and doctrine formed the basis for what became the four
books of the Shiite hadith canon: the Kāfī fī ‘ilm al-dīn of Muhammad b. Ya‘qūb al-Kulaynī (d.
329/939), the Man lā yahduruhu al-faqīh of Ibn Bābawayh (d. 381/991) and the two
collections of Abū Ja‘far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Tūsī (d. 460/1067), the Tahdhīb al-ahkām
and the Istibsār fīmā ukhtulifa fīhi al-akhbār. While the Sunni hadith canon is made of books
very similar to one another in structure and purpose (they are all from the sunan genre), the
components of the Shiite canon represent varying tools for different visions of the role of
hadith in religious rulemaking.17
Al-Kulaynī offered his massive al-Kāfī fī ‘ilm al-dīn (The Sufficient Book in the Knowledge
of Religion) as a source for Shiites who could not find scholars possessing true knowledge of
Islam or sort out the tangled web of reports narrated from the Prophet and the imams. Al-
Kulaynī says that this dearth of knowledge was due to the unwillingness of scholars to resort
only to ‘the Quran and the Prophet’s sunna with true knowledge and understanding.’ Instead,
they have turned to blind imitation (taqlīd), what they saw as their own best judgment
(istihsān) and baseless interpretation (ta’wīl). The Kāfī, al-Kulaynī says, is the answer. It will
suffice for ‘those who want knowledge of the religion and to act on it according to authentic

 reports from the Truthful Ones [i.e., the imams] and the established Sunna that is the basis for
right legal action.’18 The Kāfī covers the whole range of legal topics applicable in Muslim life
as well as the issues of the origins and nature of the imamate. Like al-Bukhārī’s Sahīh, the very
structure of the books explains the lessons the reader should derive from it; the titles of each
subchapter instruct the reader how to understand the hadiths it includes. The author trusts the
book to be its own explanation.
A generation later, the great Ibn Bābawayh compiled another comprehensive topical hadith
collection designed to assist Imami Shiites who had no other source for understanding Islam
properly. His Man lā yahduruhu al-faqīh (He Who Has No Legal Scholar at Hand) is even
more consciously a reference work than the Kāfī. Unlike al-Kulaynī, Ibn Bābawayh does not
provide full isnāds for each hadith. He does not want the reader to concern himself with such
specialized details, but rather assures his audience that he has only included reports that are
authentic.19
Ibn Bābawayh and early Imami scholars sought to meet the immediate challenges facing the
community with reports from the Prophet and imams alone as evidence. Ibn Bābawayh’s most
famous student, Muhammad b. al-Nu‘mān al-Hārithī (d. 413/1022), called al-Shaykh al-Mufīd,
however, was a Mu‘tazilite rationalist who saw hadiths as only a limited component of
elaborating law and doctrine for the Imami community. Hadiths should be part of a larger
framework for understanding Islam, used properly and supervised by a more authoritative
master: reason. As a follower of the Mu‘tazilite school in Baghdad, al-Shaykh al-Mufīd
believed that rational investigation was an essential tool for determining correct belief, and he
abandoned his teacher Ibn Bābawayh’s reliance on using āhād reports from the imams as
evidence in many issues.20
It was one of al-Shaykh al-Mufīd’s students in Baghdad who would be responsible for half of
the Shiite hadith canon and become one of the most influential scholars in Shiism: Muhammad
b. al-Hasan al-Tūsī (d. 460/1067). While al-Kulaynī and Ibn Bābawayh had assured their
readers that their books consisted of only authentic hadiths, al-Tūsī’s two hadith works made
this authentication process more transparent. Furthermore, for him hadiths were clearly just
one part in a larger process of deriving law. Al-Tūsī’s first book, the Tahdhīb al-ahkām, is in
fact not a true hadith collection at all. It is a commentary on a legal work by al-Shaykh al-
Mufīd (called al-Muqni’), structured along its lines but focusing on its hadiths. Al-Tūsī’s al-
Istibsār fīmā ukhtulifa fīhi al-akhbār (Seeking Clarity on that which Reports Differ)
resembles much more closely the books that Sunni scholars like al-Shāfi‘ī devoted to sorting
out and reconciling hadiths that seemed to contradict one another: books of ikhtilāf al-hadīth
(see Chapter 5).
Western scholars refer to these four collections as the Shiite hadith ‘canon’ because Shiites
consider them the most authoritative sources for hadiths.21 In effect, with the compilation of
these four works, the earlier usūl and topical hadith collections became practically obsolete.22
The authority of the canonical collections does not, however, entail that criticizing the
authenticity of hadiths in them is unseemly or impermissible. Their canonicity derives from
their widespread acceptance and use, not their infallibility.

 CONTINUED HADITH LITERATURE AND THE MEGA-COLLECTIONS
Of course, the formation of the Shiite hadith canon did not mean an end to Shiite hadith
literature. Ibn Bābawayh devoted several books to explaining the legal reasoning behind a
selection of hadiths as well as explaining the meanings of controversial or confusing hadiths
(his ‘Ilal al-sharā’i‘ and Ma‘ānī al-akhbār). We also have the surviving records of great
Shiite scholars like Ibn Bābawayh giving dictation sessions (amālī) to students in which they
would narrate a selection of hadiths from the Prophet, the imams, and even Sunni hadith
transmitters for teaching purposes. Of course, Shiite scholars continued to write about the
virtues of the imams in books like Khasā’is amīr al-mu’minīn by al-Sharīf al-Radī (d.
406/1015) and the Kitāb al-irshād fī ma‘rifat hujaj Allāh ‘alā al-‘ibād by al-Shaykh al-
Mufīd. Although not strictly a hadith collection, al-Sharīf al-Radī’s Nahj al-balāgha (The Path
of Eloquence), a collection of what are said to be the speeches of ‘Alī b. Abī Tālib (of which
some are clearly among the oldest surviving pieces of Arabic writing), is seen as a literary
masterpiece by Shiites and Sunnis alike (although Sunnis consider much of the book to be
forged).23 Also frequently cited is Ibn Shahrāshūb’s (d. 588/1192) collection of all the
literature on the lives, virtues and feats of the imams: the massive Manāqib Āl b. Ābī Tālib.
The greatest transformative step that the Shiite hadith tradition took after its canon had
formed, however, occurred much later. In the early seventeenth century, a movement arose
among Shiite scholars in the Hijaz, Iraq, and Iran that opposed what it viewed as the overly
rationalist character of Imami Shiite thought as well as the overly hierarchical structure of the
Shiite clergy. Followers of this trend believed that Imami Shiites should reaffirm their reliance
on the hadiths of the Imams as the only true way to understand law and dogma properly, and
they were thus known as the Akhbārī school (because of its reliance on akhbār, reports). This
led to a renewed interest in collecting and commenting on Shiite hadiths in the seventeenth
century.24
Although Shiites did not develop as extensive a tradition of penning massive commentaries
on their hadith collections as did Sunnis, in this period they did amass several mega-
collections that combined and commented on existing hadith works, and some of which are
more gigantic than even the largest Sunni commentary.25 Three of these mega-collections are
extremely well known. The first is the Wasā’il al-shī‘a ilā ahādīth al-sharī‘a (The Paths of
the Shiites to the Hadiths of the Holy Law) by Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-‘Āmilī (d.
1104/1693). Second, Mullā Muhsin Fayd al-Kāshānī (d. 1091/1680) wrote a massive digest
and commentary on the four canonical hadith collections, entitled al-Wāfī. The last is a work
astounding not only in its vast size, but also in the great accuracy with which its author drew on
and cited earlier books. The mammoth Bihār al-anwār (Oceans of Light) by Muhammad Bāqir
al-Majlisī (d. 1110/1700), one hundred and ten printed volumes, is so enormous that one needs
a guidebook, the Safīnat al-bihār (The Ship of the Seas) by ‘Abbās al-Qummī (d. 1936) to
navigate it effectively. The Bihār covers almost all the topics pertinent to Shiite history, belief,
and law. Not only does Majlisī’s huge collection include the material found in earlier hadith
books, the author also unearthed old manuscripts of usūl that survive only in his book.26
Majlisī’s work is encyclopedic, not critical, and he left his readers to decide what material is

 authentic or not.
SHIITE HADITH CRITICISM
Shiite hadith criticism began much later than its Sunni counterpart, appearing in full force only
in the early eleventh century. While the imams were alive, there was no need to worry about
forged hadiths – any reports attributed to an earlier imam would be checked by his
descendants.27 In the immediate wake of the twelfth imam’s disappearance, however, Shiites
like al-Kulaynī, and later Ibn Bābawayh, understood that it was now the responsibility of
scholars to assure that the Shiite community only acted on reports authentically traced to the
imams. The failure of scholars to distinguish between reliable and unreliable hadiths had been
a leading motivation for the writing of al-Kulaynī’s and Ibn Bābawayh’s collections. Writing in
the decades after the final occultation of the twelfth imam, Ibn Bābawayh already
acknowledged that the two usūl books of Zayd al-Zarrād and Zayd al-Narsī were forged.28
Early Shiite hadith scholars like al-Kulaynī and Ibn Bābawayh had believed that the usūl of
the imams contained all the knowledge necessary for the Shiite community to survive during
the Hidden Imam’s absence. This school of thought, later known as the Akhbārī school,
considered the four canonical collections to be totally reliable records of the earlier usūl
books. With the rise of the Shiite Mu‘tazilite school of al-Shaykh al-Mufīd in Baghdad (later
the origin of the Usūli school, which advocated the use of independent legal reasoning and a
more critical use of hadiths), Shiite scholars began to look more skeptically at the contents and
use of these collections. Their contents sometimes created serious liability for what had
emerged as Imami orthodoxy. Al-Kulaynī’s Usūl, for example, contained a report that the
existing Quran was only one third of the original revealed book. In the decades after al-
Kulaynī’s death, however, Ibn Bābawayh had established the historical integrity of the Quranic
text as a tenet of Imami belief.29 Imami scholars acknowledged that some reports in these books
could have been inserted by Shiites with deviant beliefs. Moreover, even a pious and well-
intentioned usūl compiler could have made an error in including one report instead of another.
Like the Sunnis, some Imami Shiites forged hadiths to help reinforce communal identity. One
forged hadith, for example, said that visiting the grave of the eighth imam, ‘Alī al-Ridā, in
Mashhad was worth seventy pilgrimages to Mecca.30
Transmitter Criticism
Like the Sunni tradition, Shiite hadith criticism centered on evaluating transmitters and then
using this information to help decide the reliability of isnāds. Proper belief was the
centerpiece of Shiite transmitter criticism. Before the occultation of the twelfth imam and the
formation of a distinct Imami Shiite community, there was a sense that a Muslim’s realization
that the family of the Prophet was the sole religious authority was testament enough to his
reliability. It was thus reported that Ja‘far al-Sādiq had said, ‘Know the status of people by the
extent to which they narrate from us (i‘rifū manāzil al-nās ‘alā qadr riwāyatihim ‘annā).’31
As the Shiite scholarly tradition grew more elaborate, however, this would not suffice. Al-
Shaykh al-Mufīd’s student, the famous al-Tūsī (d. 460/1067), began developing a system of

 transmitter criticism to weed out reports from unreliable people and ensure that Shiites were
only taking hadiths from ‘the party of truth.’32 Although al-Tūsī seems to have been the first
Shiite to employ a system of rating the reliability of transmitters, like the Sunnis, Shiite hadith
scholars had long been keeping records in order to identify the myriad of people who made up
their isnāds to the imams. Ahmad Ibn ‘Uqda (d. 332/944) devoted a large book to identifying
all the people who studied with and transmitted the teachings of Ja‘far al-Sādiq, Ahmad b.
Muhammad al-Hamdānī (d. 333/944–5) wrote a book entitled ‘The Book of Dates and Those
Who Narrated Hadiths (Kitāb al-tārīkh wa dhikr man rawā al-hadīth),’ and later Ahmad b.
Muhammad al-Jawharī (d. 401/1010–11) compiled a work called ‘The Comprehensive Book
on Identifying Hadith Transmitters (Kitāb al-ishtimāl ‘alā ma‘rifat al-rijāl).’33 Although these
books have been lost, the earliest surviving book on Shiite transmitters, that of Muhammad b.
‘Umar al-Kashshī (d. c. 340/951), focuses on laying out the full names of transmitters, their
relationships to other transmitters and, if possible, when they lived. Like many early Sunni
books of hadith transmitters, these books were concerned more with identifying transmitters
than criticizing them.
When he began his efforts to make sure no fraudulent material had crept into the usūl since
the disappearance of the twelfth imam, al-Tūsī had to ensure that Shiites had received material
from Muslims with the proper beliefs. Certainly, Imami Shiites needed to be on guard against
hadiths forged or propagated by anti-Shiite Sunnis. But the more immediate danger was sifting
out reports from Shiites who had extremist beliefs like the deification of ‘Alī and those who
believed that the line of the Prophet had ended with an earlier imam going into occultation.
Before worrying about Sunni opponents, the Imami community had to demonstrate that it was
not extremist and to distinguish itself from other Shiites.
Al-Tūsī’s book of transmitter criticism (Rijāl al-Tūsī) is thus more concerned with
identifying Shiite transmitters who believed that it was actually an earlier imam, like Mūsā al-
Kāzim, who had disappeared and ended the imamate than with criticizing anti-Shiite Sunnis.
Ibn Hanbal, a fierce critic of Shiism, is mentioned in the books with no disapproving comment,
while many Shiites are dismissed for their belief in the occultation of an earlier imam or their
extremist Shiite beliefs. Al-Tūsī tries to list those transmitters who collected usūl from the
imams, determining whether they are ‘trustworthy (thiqa)’ or not.
Abū al-‘Abbās al-Najāshī (d. 450/1058) followed al-Tūsī in compiling an influential book
of Shiite transmitter criticism, the Rijāl al-Najāshī. Unlike al-Tūsī, however, he aimed his
book at a Sunni audience. Tired of his opponents accusing Shiites of having no trad-ition of
hadith transmission and hadith books, he offers example after example of accomplished Shiite
hadith authors and the isnāds in which he found them. He even uses books of Sunni transmitters
to help in his evaluation. It appears, in fact, that al-Najāshī was consciously imitating the
methods and language of Sunni transmitter criticism; he frequently called narrators ‘weak
(da‘īf),’ or ‘having accurate transmissions (sahīh al-samā‘),’ just like his Sunni
contemporaries.
Isnād and Matn Criticism

 Al-Tūsī not only seems to have been the first Imami scholar consistently to evaluate hadith
transmitters, he was also the first to apply these criticisms to authenticate or dismiss hadiths. In
the Istibsār he uses isnād criticisms to show how what seems to be two contradictory hadiths
is really just an unreliable hadith clashing with a reliable one.34 The Shiite science of isnād
criticism was further developed by Jamāl al-Dīn b. Tāwūs (d. 673/1274) of Baghdad and the
great founder of the Hilla school in Iraq, ‘Allāma Muhammad b. Idrīs al-Hillī (d. 726/1325).
Shiite hadith criticism continued to draw on and in effect mirror Sunni hadith criticism. The
first major book defining the technical terms and methods of Shiite hadith criticism, written by
al-Shahīd al-Thānī (d. 965/1558) (entitled ‘Knowledge of Hadith, Dirāyat al-hadīth’), is
basically a digest of the Sunni Ibn al-Salāh’s famous Muqaddima. Only on a few important
issues does the Shiite method diverge from its Sunni counterpart. For example, a hadith is
defined as the report transmitted from any ‘infallible (ma‘sūm)’ individual, not just the
Prophet. This allows for the Shiite reliance on the hadiths of the imams.35 The concern for
avoiding extremist Shiites or believers in earlier vanished imams appears clearly in the labels
that Shiites use to indicate unreliable narrators: ‘extremist (ghāl)’ and ‘believing in the
occultation of an earlier imam (Wāqifī),’ from whom one can accept hadiths only before he
adopted deviant beliefs.36
Allowance is made for occasionally narrating from Sunnis: one of the sub-grades of hasan
hadiths, ‘trustable (muwaththaq),’ is defined as a hadith that is reliable even though a Sunni is
in the isnād.37 Al-Shahīd al-Thānī sharply critiques his Sunni brethren by noting how they
concerned themselves only with the outward signs of a transmitter’s upright character (‘adāla),
ignoring the need for an appropriate belief in the family of the Prophet. Hence, he says with an
air of tragedy, there is such a plethora of supposedly ‘authentic’ hadiths in Sunni eyes.38
As the Sunnis knew well, Mu‘tazilism had always held an examin-ation of the contents of a
hadith to be the final arbiter in determining its authenticity. The Shiite adoption of the
Mu‘tazilite framework in the eleventh century thus meant that content criticism would enjoy a
more prominent role in Shiite hadith criticism than it did among Sunnis. Just because the isnād
was reliable did not mean the report was authentic or legally compelling.39 Al-Sharīf al-
Murtadā (d. 436/1044) maintained that every report attributed to the Prophet or imams had to
be authenticated by reason.40 Influential scholars like ‘Allāma al-Hillī would not even accept
the medium grade of reports, hasan, because they were too unreliable.41
Interestingly, even the earlier Akhbārī scholars like al-Kulaynī had reserved an important
role for content criticism. The Kāfī cites a number of hadiths from the Prophet and Ja‘far al-
Sādiq with statements like ‘Everything is compared to the Book of God and the Sunna, and any
hadith that does not agree with the Book of God is but varnished falsehood.’42 While Sunni
scholars had uniformly rejected statements such as Ja‘far’s because they contradicted the
important role of hadiths in explaining and modifying the Quran (see Chapter 5), Shiites
embraced them as an indication of the importance of content criticism.
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SUNNI AND SHIITE HADITHS
Although we have seen some of the important differences between the Sunni and Shiite

 traditions of hadith study, they have never been totally separate. They share common origins,
overlap, and have interacted with one another over the course of Islamic history. The chief
factors for the commonalities or interactions between the two have been the decidedly non-
sectarian beliefs of many early Shiites, the lingering (and sometimes burgeoning) devotion to
the family of the Prophet among Sunnis, and the Shiite need to draw on Sunni hadiths in their
defense of Shiite doctrine.
To what extent can we talk about separate bodies of Sunni and Shiite hadiths? In the first two
hundred years after the death of the Prophet, the majority of early Shiites did not espouse a
doctrine that differed dramatically from the majority of Muslims. Of course, there were those
supporters of ‘Alī and his family who despised or totally rejected the legitimacy of the first
two rulers after the Prophet – Abū Bakr and ‘Umar – who were lionized by mainstream Sunni
Islam. Sunnis could generally not accept such Shiites as Muslims in good standing. Other early
Shiite extremists believed that ‘Alī was God incarnate and were thus ostracized uniformly by
other Muslims, Sunnis and Shiites alike. There was also a germinating Imami community who
looked to the Shiite imams for sole religious guidance. Most early Shiites, however, were
merely characterized by ‘an enhanced reverence’ for the descendants of the Prophet, an
attraction to their charisma and support for their general disapproval for the less-than-ideal
regimes of the Umayyads and early Abbasids.43 Love for the family of the Prophet was
particularly intense in Kufa, ‘Alī’s adopted capital and the setting for many ‘Alid revolts
against the Umayyads. In fact, Sunni hadith critics accepted that, in the case of a Kufan
transmitter, such loyalties did not mean the transmitter was necessarily Shiite. It was just part
and parcel of being Kufan.
Although never considered infallible religious authorities or the perennial rightful rulers of
Islam, the family of the Prophet has always been venerated in Sunni Islam. Certainly, in times
of intense Sunni/Shiite conflict or in the writings of diehard Sunnis like Ibn Taymiyya (d.
728/1328), Sunnis have deemphasized this. Even the notoriously anti-Shiite Shams al-Dīn al-
Dhahabī (d. 748/1348), however, warned ‘May God curse those who do not love ‘Alī.’44
Especially in the first two centuries of Islam, many scholars later glorified by Sunni
Muslims, such as Abū Hanīfa and al-Shāfi‘ī, displayed pronounced affection for the family of
the Prophet. Brought before the Abbasid caliph on charges of being an extreme Shiite, al-
Shāfi‘ī composed a verse of poetry proclaiming that, if loving the family of the Prophet was
being a heretic, then he would proudly admit to that charge. Even the most trusted Sunni hadith
collections contain hadiths urging Muslims to love and honor the Prophet’s family and
descendants. Al-Bukhārī included in his famous Sahīh the report in which the Prophet said,
‘Fatima is part of me, so whoever has angered her has angered me (Fātima bad‘a minnī
fa-man aghdabahā aghdabanī).’45
In the seventh and eighth centuries, much of what would make up the Shiite hadith corpus was
just hadiths expounding the virtues of ‘Alī.46 Sunni hadith critics embraced much of this
material. Ibn Hanbal himself commented that ‘there has not appeared via authentic isnāds,
hadiths testifying to the virtues of any Companion like what has appeared testifying to the
virtues of ‘Alī b. Abī Tālib.’47

 In the eighth century, however, as the sayings of imams like Ja‘far al-Sādiq were compiled,
we see the emergence of an independent body of specifically Shiite hadiths.48 By the time of the
twelfth imam’s final disappearance in 941 CE, the body of material that made up the Shiite
hadith corpus was effectively complete.49 What sorts of hadiths did this corpus consist of?
First, we find hadiths that are simply not found among Sunnis, such as hadiths in which the
Prophet is quoted as explicitly foretelling the coming of the twelve imams and ordering
Muslims to follow them, or the hadiths of the imams themselves. Sunnis would never accept
hadiths requiring them to believe in the Twelver imamate, nor would they even consider the
reports of the imams as counting as ‘hadiths.’ With their collection of the hadiths of the imams,
the Shiites thus built up a body of material totally absent in Sunni hadith collections even
though they might dovetail perfectly with Sunni themes. Reports in the Kāfī in which Mūsā al-
Kāzim curses those who use analogical reasoning to derive Islamic law would fit seamlessly
into the writings of Ibn Hanbal or al-Bukharī, but the fact that they were the hadiths of an imam
put them outside the pale of Sunni Prophetic hadiths.50
Second, we find pro-Shiite hadiths that appear in Sunni books but without the sectarian
element. In the collection of Ibn Bābawayh’s dictation sessions (Amālī), he narrates a hadith
that the pro-‘Alid Companion Jābir b. ‘Abdallāh narrated from the Prophet: ‘ ‘Alī b. Abī Tālib
is the earliest to embrace Islam in my community, the most knowledgeable of them, the
most correct in his religion, the most virtuous in his certainty, the most prudent, generous
and brave of heart, and he is the imam and caliph after me.’51 We find that many Sunni
hadith collections, even early ones such as the Musannaf of ‘Abd al-Razzāq al-San‘ānī (d.
211/827) and the Musnad of Ibn Hanbal, include the section of this hadith that says that ‘Alī is
‘the earliest to embrace Islam in my community, the most knowledgeable of them.’ The sections
ordaining him as caliph and imam, however, are absent.
Third, we find hadiths with a distinct pro-‘Alid content that both Sunnis and Shiites accept
equally. For example, the famous hadith of Ghadīr Khumm, in which the aging Prophet stops
his followers by the pool of Ghadīr Khumm and tells them ‘Whoever’s master I am, ‘Alī is
his master.’ The vaunted Sunni hadith critics al-Tirmidhī and al-Hākim al-Naysābūrī both
considered this report to be authentic. In another hadith that al-Hākim, Ibn Khuzayma, and even
the great Muslim b. al-Hajjāj include in their Sahīh collections, the Prophet tells his followers,
‘Indeed I am leaving you with two things of great import (thaqalayn) ... you will not go
astray as long as you hold fast to them: the Book of God and my family.’
Of course, Sunnis and Shiites have upheld two very different interpretations of these hadiths.
Shiites view them as clear evidence that Muhammad wished ‘Alī and his descendants through
Fatima to succeed him both in temporal and religious leadership of the Muslim community.
Sunnis view them as two exhortations to honor ‘Alī and the Prophet’s family, but contextualize
such hadiths with the plentiful pool of reports in which the Prophet praises his leading
Companions like Abū Bakr and ‘Umar using the same language and appears to reserve places
of leadership for them.
Some Sunnis were less patient with such pro-‘Alid hadiths than others. Al-Hākim al-
Naysābūrī, who was so accepting of pro-‘Alid reports that he was accused of Shiism, declared

 authentic the hadith in which the Prophet supposedly said, ‘O Fatima, God is angered when
you are angered, God is pleased when you are pleased.’ Al-Hākim’s teacher, al-Dāraqutnī
(d. 385/995), however, was not so generous. He exposed it as a hadith that the fifth imam
Muhammad al-Bāqir attributed directly to the Prophet – a typical and laudable Shiite isnād, but
a case of broken transmission (mursal) according to Sunnis.52 Al-Tabarānī’s collections
featured a hadith in which the Prophet reversed the sun so that ‘Alī could make up a prayer he
had missed. Ibn al-Jawzī, Mullā ‘Alī al-Qārī and others ruled it a forgery by Shiites, while
other prominent Sunnis like Qādī ‘Iyād and al-Suyūtī declared it sahīh.53
Finally, many Shiite hadiths appear in the Sunni collections that aimed merely at collecting as
many hadiths as possible and made no pretension at any critical stringency. Many of these
collections, such as the Hilyat al-awliyā’ (The Ornament of the Saints) of Abū Nu‘aym al-
Isbahānī (d. 430/1038), were works devoted to documenting the rich heritage of Sufism and
therefore included a great deal of pro-‘Alid material. ‘Alī was, after all, seen as the progenitor
of the Sufi tradition and the beginning of most of the isnāds though which the Sunni Sufi orders
traced their teachings to the Prophet (see Chapter 7). These reports were generally innocuous,
with no sectarian edge, and urged goodly and pious behavior. While Ibn Bābawayh quoted the
fifth imam Muhammad al-Bāqir that the Prophet had said that the best of God’s slaves are those
‘Who, when they seek perfection in their acts, hope for good tidings, seek forgiveness
when they do wrong, are thankful to God when they give, persevere when they are tried,
and forgive when they are angered,’ Abū Nu‘aym cites it through a very Sunni isnād in his
Hilyat al-awliyā’.54
The biggest factor in the Sunni embrace of many Shiite hadiths was the veneration for the
family of the Prophet that gained great currency among the Sunni Muslim majority of Egypt,
Iraq, Iran, and Central Asia beginning in the eleventh century. In that time, almost every village
and town ‘discovered’ its own imāmzāde, or the tomb of a pious descendant of the Prophet, to
serve as a local pilgrimage and miracle center.55 The Sunni fascination with the family of the
Prophet as a medium for baraka (blessing) led to a widespread study and transmission of
hadiths narrated through the Shiite imams, even if professional hadith scholars like al-Dhahabī
and Mullā ‘Alī Qārī (d. 1014/1606) decried such books as forgeries. In the Iranian city of
Qazvin in particular, the Sahīfa of the eighth imam ‘Alī Ridā (d. 203/818), who traced his
isnāds back through the imams to the Prophet, became widely transmitted for pietistic
purposes. Most of its contents were harmless pieces of advice, such as ‘Knowledge is a
treasure, and questions are its key.’56
The religious power of an isnād through the imams sometimes manifested itself in bizarre and
miraculous reports. The great Sunni hadith critic Ibn Abī Hātim al-Rāzī (d. 327/938) is
reported (falsely, in my opinion) to have said that once, when he was in Syria, he saw a man
unconscious in the road. He remembered that one of his teachers had once told him, ‘the isnād
of ‘Alī Ridā, if it is read over a senseless person, he’ll recover.’ Ibn Abī Hātim tried out this
cure, and the man returned immediately to health.57
As we found in our discussion of Sunni hadiths, for Sunni critics a hadith transmitter’s
sectarian affiliation ultimately took the back seat to his or her reliability in transmission. If you

 consistently transmitted hadiths that were corroborated by other experts, even deviant beliefs
would not disqualify you from participating in the Sunni hadith tradition. Individuals with
pronounced Shiite leanings, such as ‘Abd al-Rahmān b. Sālih (d. 235/849–50) and Sa‘īd b.
Khuthaym (d. 180/796–97), thus served as respected and valued transmitters in mainstay Sunni
hadith books such as the Sunans of al-Nasā’ī and al-Tirmidhī. In theory, Sunni hadith critics
restricted themselves from accepting the transmissions of Shiite narrators who tried to convert
others to their cause (since this might provoke them to forge pro-Shiite hadiths) or, at the very
least, not accepting those hadiths with a pro-‘Alid message from such Shiite transmitters. In
reality, however, even the great Muslim b. al-Hajjāj included in his Sahīh a report from a
known Shiite, ‘Adī b. Thābit (d. 116/734), in which the Prophet announced that only a believer
could love ‘Alī and only a hypocrite could hate him.
As such, we find a marked overlap of transmitters between the Sunni and Shiite hadith
traditions. Abān b. Taghlib (d. 140/757) was a well-known and devoted Kufan Shiite who
appears as a narrator from the imams in al-Kulaynī’s Kāfī, but all the Sunni Six Books except
Sahīh al-Bukhārī included his hadiths as well.
On rare occasions, there was also overlap between Sunnis and Shiites on influential hadith
critics. Ibn ‘Uqda (d. 332/944) was the most important collector of the Shiite usūl and a
pioneer in compiling the names of Shiite transmitters.58 Yet he was praised by the most
prominent Sunni critics of his day, like al-Dāraqutnī and Ibn ‘Adī, and later the scholar al-
Subkī (d. 771/1370) called him ‘one of the hadith masters of the Shariah;’59 this, even though
he was such a staunch Shiite that he occasionally disparaged Abū Bakr and ‘Umar. He
commanded one the most impressive memories of his day, either having memorized or being
current with 850,000 hadiths, 3,000 from the family of the Prophet alone. When he wanted to
move from his native Kufa, he found that his personal library of six hundred camel-loads of
books prevented him. Not only did Sunnis appreciate Ibn ‘Uqda’s command of hadith
transmissions, they also valued his opinions on evaluating transmitter criticism. In fact, the
earliest evaluation of al-Bukhārī’s and Muslim’s famous Sahīhayn comes from Ibn ‘Uqda.60
SHIITE USE OF SUNNI HADITHS
Imami Shiism matured under the looming shadow of the Sunni Abbasid caliphate and had to
survive under Sunni states such as the Seljuq Turks, the Ilkhanid Mongols, and the Ottoman
Empire. Even during periods in which Shiites achieved political ascendancy, such as the tenth
century (called the ‘Shiite Century’ because the Shiite Buyids ruled Iraq and Iran, with the
Shiite Fatimids in Egypt and Syria), Shiites still lived as a minority among the Sunni masses.
Shiite scholars very much appreciated the use of Sunni hadiths, especially reports with a
pro-‘Alid bent, as tools for either debating their Sunni opponents or convincing them that
Imami Shiism presented no threat to Sunni Islam. The Shiite scholar Radī al-Dīn Ibn Tāwūs (d.
664/1266) kept a digest of the Sahīhayn in his library for such uses.61 In such cases, Shiites
would abandon their own method of hadith criticism and play by Sunni rules in the hopes of
convincing Sunnis on their own terms.
Ibn Bābawayh, for example, began one of his dictation sessions in the mosque with a hadith

 narrated from the Prophet by Abū Hurayra, whom Shiites considered an arch-liar who had
covered up ‘Alī’s right to the caliphate by forging hadiths to the contrary. In this hadith,
however, Abū Hurayra is quoted telling the Muslims to fast on the eight-eenth of the month Dhū
al-Hijja because that was the day of Ghadīr Khumm – the day when the Prophet had announced
to his followers that ‘Alī was to be their master after him.62 In his efforts to prove that no one in
history had ever been named ‘Alī before ‘Alī b. Abī Tālib, the Shiite scholar of Qazvin, Abū
al-Husayn Qazvīnī (d. c. 560/1165), invoked as evidence the Sahīhayn and other Sunni hadith
books that ‘are relied upon.’ Qazvīnī tells his opponents to ‘take up the Sahīhayn’ and find the
hadith that says that ‘Alī’s name is written on the leg of God’s throne and on the doorway to
Paradise as the brother of Muhammad. Since both these structures existed before the creation
of the world, ‘Alī is doubtless the first person to have been so named.63 Qazvīnī’s attempt was
admirable, but it did not convince his opponents; the hadiths he cited were nowhere to be
found in the Sahīhayn or any reputable Sunni collection.64
THE ZAYDI HADITH TRADITION
Zaydism is a branch of Shiism associated with Zayd b. ‘Alī (d. 122/740), son of the fourth
imam ‘Alī Zayn al-‘Ābidīn, who rebelled unsuccessfully against the Umayyads in the twilight
days of their rule. Although Zaydi Islam is a relatively small sect, flourishing in classical times
in Kufa and northern Iran but now limited to northern Yemen, its hadith tradition deserves
attention due to both its originality and influence.
Zaydis believe that the true teachings of Islam, as a religious system and a message of
political justice, have been preserved by members of the family of the Prophet who rose up
against the tyrannical and impious rule of the Umayyads, Abbasids, and later dynasties. Unlike
Sunnis, Zaydis do not see early Islamic history as an idealized expansion of the pure faith
under ultimately legitimate Muslim rulers. Zaydis believe that ‘Alī should have been the first
caliph, but, unlike Imami Shiites, they believe that the Prophet’s instruction on this matter was
ambiguous.65 Zaydis also break with Imami Shiism by not attributing a specific line of
infallible, divinely specified imams with any special access to the esoteric truths of Islam and
the Quran. Nor do they pay any special attention to the awaited Hidden Imam. Instead, Zaydis
believe that the family of the Prophet is the histor-ical protector and preserver of the true
teachings of Islam and that it is their duty to stand up for justice in the face of oppressive
rulers. Any member of the family of the Prophet who combines a mastery of Islamic
scholarship with an ability to stand up against injustice has the right to call himself the imam.
In many ways, Zaydism is a middle ground between Sunni and Imami Shiite Islam.
In their outlook on hadiths, Zaydis can be distinguished from Sunnis by four features: 1) an
enhanced reverence for the family of the Prophet, 2) a case-by-case evaluation of the
Companions, 3) a more cynical view of early Islamic history, and 4) their Mu‘tazilite thought.
Zaydis summarize this with a quote from their Imam al-Hasan b. Yahyā b. al-Husayn b. Zayd b.
‘Alī:
 
The solution to disagreements over what is permissible and prohibited is to follow the clear and established texts from the

 Quran and to draw on those well-known, consistently transmitted reports from the Prophet which have no chance of being
conspired forgery, as well as reports from the righteous members of his Family that agree with the clear indications of the
Book of God. In addition, we must follow the just and pious members of the Family of the Messenger of God. These are
the compelling proofs for Muslims, and it is not permitted to follow other than these.66
 
The Zaydi Imam al-Murtadā Muhammad b. Yahyā (d. 310/922) said:
 
Indeed many hadiths disagree with the Book of God most high and contradict it, so we do not heed them, nor do we use
them as proof. But all that agrees with the Book of God, testified to by it as correct, is authentic according to us, and we
accept it as evidence. And also what our ancestors narrated, father from son, from ‘Alī, from the Prophet, we use as
proof. And what was narrated by the reliable (thiqāt) people of the Prophet’s Companions, we accept and apply it. And
what disagrees with [all] this we do not see as correct, nor do we espouse it.67
 
Zaydis feel that there is undeniable evidence from the Quran and Sunna that ‘Alī and his
descendants through the Prophet’s daughter enjoy unique virtues and leadership
responsibilities. The legal rulings and consensus of scholars from the Family of the Prophet
and the hadiths they transmit are authoritative for Zaydis. Like Imamis, Zaydis accept the
mursal hadiths of imams (their narrations from the Prophet without citing a full isnād). In
addition, as Imam Sharaf al-Dīn (d. 965/1557–8) stated, whatever scholars from the Family of
the Prophet declare to be authentic hadiths is so. Although Zaydis foreswear those who openly
opposed the Family of the Prophet, they generally allow the narration of hadiths from Sunni
transmitters either in order to use their hadiths as evidence against them or because those
specific hadiths have been verified by Zaydi scholars. One of the Zaydi criticisms of the Sunni
hadith tradition is the relatively small reliance on hadiths transmitted through the family of the
Prophet. Zaydi scholars, for example, blame al-Bukhārī for narrating hadiths via Khārijites
known for their hatred of ‘Alī but not through the revered imam Ja‘far al-Sādiq.
Zaydi Islam also upholds a unique stance on the Companions of the Prophet. Both Sunni and
Imami Shiite Islam espouse absolute positions – either anyone who saw the Prophet even for a
moment was upstanding or only those who actively supported ‘Alī were. For Zaydis, only
those individuals who enjoyed prolonged exposure to the Prophet and remained loyal to his
teachings after his death are worthy of the title ‘Companion.’ Individuals known for impious
behavior, like Walīd b. ‘Uqba, or those who actively fought against ‘Alī, such as Mu‘āwiya,
are not considered to be Companions at all. Zaydis take Sunnis to task for naively believing
that anyone who met the Prophet could serve as a reliable hadith transmitter.
Zaydis maintained this more cynical perspective in their approach to early Islamic history in
general. The political agendas of Umayyad and Abbasid rule, they assert, left lasting affects on
Sunni Islam. They believed that the Umayyads had encouraged the forgery of anti-Alid hadiths
as well as hadiths praising other less worthy Companions. The Abbasids cultivated the four
Sunni madhhabs as a means to stem any loyalty to the Family of the Prophet, making a
dismissal of the Prophet’s Family a hallmark of early Sunni Islam.
As influential to their hadith worldview as their Alid loyalties is the Zaydi commitment to the
Mu‘tazilite school of theology and legal theory. Like other Mu‘tazilites, Zaydis believe that
passing the tests of the Quran and reason is essential for determining the authenticity of hadith.

 Zaydis often require hadiths to be massively transmitted (mutawātir) or accepted by the
consensus of scholars in order to be used in defining theological stances. But Zaydis also
accepted hadiths on these subjects if they were approved by imams. The Mu‘tazilite rejection
of anthropomorphism has led Zaydis to dismiss any hadith that describes God in overly human
terms in a manner that could not be interpreted figuratively. Zaydis thus hold that hadiths like
the ones stating that when God sits on his throne it squeaks like a saddle or that Muhammad is
physically seated next to God on His throne are elements of Jewish and Christian lore that
crept into the Islamic tradition through early converts like Ka‘b al-Ahbār.
Major Zaydi Hadith Collections and Critics
The specifically Zaydi corpus of hadith is not as vast as either its Sunni or Imami Shiite
counterparts. Its foundation is the Musnad of Zayd b. ‘Alī, which Zaydis claim to be the first
book of hadiths written in Islam. It consists of 228 Prophetic hadiths, 320 reports from ‘Alī,
and two reports from al-Husayn.68 Interestingly, many of the reports that Zayd narrates from his
great-great grandfather ‘Alī appear as Prophetic hadiths in Sunni collections, such as the
statement ‘The ulema are the heirs of the prophets. The prophets have not left a dinar or a
dirham; rather, they left knowledge as an inheritance among the scholars.’69 Small amālī,
or dictation session, collections are very important in Zaydi Islam. Two famous ones are the
Amālī of Abū Tālib Yahyā b. Husayn (d. 424/1033) and the Amālī al-sughrā of Imām al-
Mu’ayyad Ahmad b. al-Husayn al-Hārūnī (d. 421/1030). Another central work of hadith and
law is the Jāmi‘ al-kāfī of Abū ‘Abdallāh Muhammad b. ‘Alī of Kufa (d. 445/1053–4).
Zaydis have generally drawn heavily on what we would define as the Sunni and Imami Shiite
hadith reservoirs. Zaydi scholars regularly quote mainstream Sunni hadith collections as well
as Imami works like the Usūl al-kāfī of al-Kulaynī and the Nahj al-balāgha of al-Sharīf al-
Radī, choosing material that they feel conforms to Zaydi doctrine. Zaydis can draw from such
eclectic sources because of the intermediate position that their school occupies between Sunni
and Imami Shiite Islam. Sunni scholars that the Sunni tradition saw as favoring or cultivating a
great affection for the Family of the Prophet are seen by Zaydis as pious Shiites. The Zaydi
scholar Sārim al-Dīn al-Wazīrī (d. 914/1508) thus declares that al-Nasā’ī, who refused to
write a book on the virtues of Mu‘āwiya, al-Hākim al-Naysābūrī, who declared the hadith of
Ghadīr Khumm to be sahīh, and al-Tabarī are all Shiites.70
The most important works of Zaydi hadith criticism appeared relatively late in Islamic
history. Although these books draw at great length from earlier works of Zaydi hadith
scholarship, few early works have survived intact. Zaydis view Ibn ‘Uqda (d. 332/944)
(mentioned above as a Sunni and an Imami hadith critic, an indication of how elastic these
sectarian identities could be) as the progenitor of their formalized study of hadith transmitters
and criticism, citing his many lost books on the various students who transmitted from imams
like Ja‘far al-Sādiq.71 The most frequently cited later works are al-Falak al-dawwār fī ‘ulūm
al-hadīth wa al-fiqh wa al-āthār (The Orbiting Heavenly Body on the Sciences of Hadith,
Reports and Law), an ambitious one-volume work by the fifteenth-century scholar Sārim al-
Dīn Ibrāhīm al-Wazīrī that lays out the basics of the Zaydi worldview, hadith criticism,

 important transmitters, and stances on major legal issues, as well as the Kitāb al-I‘tisām of al-
Qāsim b. Muhammad b. ‘Alī (d. 1059/1620).
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
A further study of Shiite hadiths should begin with more involved reading on Shiism in general.
Heinz Halm’s Shi‘ism (2nd ed., New York, 2004) is both succinct and comprehensive,
discussing all the branches of Shiism. Moojan Momen’s An Introduction of Shi‘i Islam (New
Haven, 1985) is a classic guide to Imami Shiism in particular. For specific discussions of
Shiite hadith, see Etan Kohlberg’s chapter ‘Shī‘ī Hadīth’ in The Cambridge History of Arabic
Literature: Arabic Literature until the End of the Umayyad Period (London, 1983) as well as
his article ‘Al-Usūl al-Arba‘umi’a’ in Jerusalem Studies in Arabic and Islam 10 (1987). Ron
P. Buckley’s article ‘On the Origins of Shī‘i Hadīth’ in Muslim World 88, no. 2 (1998), Robert
Gleave’s ‘Between Hadīth and Fiqh: The “Canonical” Imāmī Collections of Akhbār’ in
Islamic Law and Society 8, no. 3 (2001), and Andrew Newman’s The Formative Period of
Twelver Shī‘ism: Hadīth as Discourse between Qum and Baghdad (Richmond, Surrey, 2000)
are also very informative. Anyone interested in the early period of Shiism under the imams
should consult Hossein Modaressi’s encyclopedic Tradition and Survival: A Bibliographical
Survey of Early Shī‘ite Literature Vol. 1 (Oxford: Oneworld, 2003). For a summary of the
circumscribed Ismaili hadith tradition, see Ismail Poonwala, ‘Hadith Isma‘ilism’ in the
Encyclopedia Iranica.
For an analysis of Imami Shiite hadith criticism, see Asma Afsaruddin’s article ‘An Insight
into the Hadīth Methodology of Jamāl al-Dīn Ah.mad b. T.āwūs,’ Der Islam 72, no. 1 (1995):
25–46.
For original works of Shiite hadith scholarship in translation, see a fascinating section of al-
Kulaynī’s Al-Kāfī, trans. Muhammad Hasan al-Rizvani (Karachi, 1995) and ‘Abd al-Hādī al-
Fadlī and al-Shahīd al-Thānī, Introduction to Hadīth, including Dirāyat al-Hadīth, trans.
Nazmina Virjee (London, 2002).
ENDNOTES
  1   Muhammad b. Ya‘qūb al-Kulaynī, Al-Kāfī (Karachi), p. 150.
  2   Ibid., pp. 158–160.
  3   Ibid., pp. 136–137.
  4   Heinz Halm, Shi‘ism, p. 36.
  5   Ibid., pp. 36–37.
  6   Ibid., p. 42.
  7   Etan Kohlberg, ‘Shī‘ī Hadīth,’ p. 301.
  8   Hossein Modaressi, Tradition and Survival, p. 81.
  9   Kohlberg, ‘Shī‘ī Hadīth, pp. 300–301.
10   Ibid., p. 306.
11   Modaressi, Tradition and Survival, p. 228.
12   Ibid., p. 147.
13   Kohlberg, ‘Shī‘ī Hadīth,’ p. 304.
14   Kohlberg, ‘Al-Usūl al-Arba‘umi’a,’ p. 133.
15   Ibid., p. 170.

 16   Ron Buckley, ‘On the Origins of Shī‘i Hadīth,’ p. 182.
17   Robert Gleave, ‘Between Hadīth and Fiqh: The “Canonical” Imāmī Collections of Akhbār,’ p. 351.
18   Al-Kulaynī, al-Usūl al-kāfī, vol. 1, pp. 45–49.
19   Ibn Bābawayh, Man lā yahduruhu al-faqīh, vol. 1, p. 71.
20   Al-Sharīf al-Murtadā, ‘al-Man‘ min al-‘amal bi-khabar al-wāhid,’ in Masā’il al-Murtadā, p. 81.
21   Gleave, p. 352.
22   Kohlberg, ‘Al-Usūl al-Arba‘umi’a,’ p. 135.
23   See al-Dhahabī, Mīzān al-i‘tidāl, vol. 3, p. 124.
24   Devin Stewart, ‘The Genesis of the Akhbārī Revival,’ p. 188.
25   Kohlberg, ‘Shī‘ī Hadīth,’ p. 306.
26   Kohlberg, ‘Al-Usūl al-Arba‘umi’a,’ p. 137.
27   Ibid., pp. 139–140.
28   Ibid., p. 141.
29   Mohammed Amir Moezzi, The Divine Guide in Early Shiism, pp. 89–90.
30   Halm, p. 58.
31   Al-Kulaynī, al-Kāfī (Karachi), pp. 129–130.
32   Kohlberg, ‘Al-Usūl al-Arba‘umi’a,’ pp. 139–141.
33   Ahmad b. ‘Alī al-Najāshī, Rijāl al-Najāshī, vol. 1, pp. 225, 240.
34   Gleave, p. 372.
35   ‘Abd al-Hādī al-Fadlī and al-Shahīd al-Thānī, Introduction to Hadīth, including Dirāyat al-Hadīth, p. 25.
36   Ibid., p. 34.
37   Ibid., p. 26.
38   Ibid., p. 25.
39   Cf. Kohlberg, ‘Shī‘ī Hadīth,’ p. 303.
40   Halm, p. 51.
41   Al-Fadlī and al-Thānī, p. 26.
42   Al-Kulaynī, al-Kāfī (Karachi), p. 179–180.
43   Buckley, p. 168.
44   Al-Dhahabī, Mīzān al-i‘tidāl, vol. 4, p. 357.
45   Sahīh al-Bukhārī: kitāb fadā’il ashāb al-Nabī, bāb manāqib qarābat Rasūl Allāh.
46   Buckley, p. 168.
47   Ibn Abī Ya‘lā, Tabaqāt al-hanābila, vol. 2, p. 156.
48   Kohlberg, ‘Shī‘ī Hadīth,’ p. 299.
49   Ibid., p. 303.
50   Al-Kulaynī, Al-Kāfī (Karachi), p. 147.
51   Ibn Bābawayh, Amālī al-sadūq, p. 7.
52   Al-Dhahabī, Mīzān al-i‘tidāl, vol. 2, p. 492; al-Hākim, al-Mustadrak, vol. 3, p. 154.
53   Al-Suyūtī, al-La’ālī al-masnū‘a, vol. 1, pp. 308–313; idem, al-Khasā’is al-kubrā, vol. 2, p. 82; al-Albānī, Silsilat al-
ahādith al-da‘īfa, vol. 2, p. 395.
54   Ibn Bābawayh, Amālī, p. 9; Abū Nu‘aym al-Isbahānī, Hilyat al-awliyā’ fī tabaqāt al-asfiyā’, vol. 6, p. 120.
55   Cf. Halm, pp. 58–59.
56   ‘Musnad ‘Alī Ridā,’ p. 446.
57   Al-Rāfi‘ī, Al-Tadwīn fī akhbār Qazwīn, vol. 3, p. 482; Sunan Ibn Mājah: muqaddima, bāb fī al-īmān.
58   Kohlberg, ‘Al-Usūl al-Arba‘umi’a,’ pp. 130–131.
59   Tāj al-Dīn al-Subkī, Tabaqāt al-shāfi‘iyya al-kubrā, vol. 1, pp. 314–316.
60   J. Brown, ‘Crossing Sectarian Boundaries,’ pp. 55–58.
61   Kohlberg, A Medieval Muslim Scholar at Work, pp. 324–325.
62   Ibn Bābawayh, Amālī, p. 2.
63   Nāsir al-Dīn Qazvīnī, Ketāb-e naqd, pp. 576–578.
64   The hadith of ‘Alī’s name being written on the doorway to Paradise does, however, appear in the Kitāb fadā’il al-sahāba
of Ahmad b. Hanbal; Ibn Hanbal, Kitāb fadā’il al-sahāba, vol. 2, p. 665.
65   Muhammad Yahyā al-‘Azzān, Al-Sahāba ‘ind al-zaydiyya, p. 56.
66   ‘Abdallāh Hamūd al-‘Izzī, ‘Ilm al-hadīth ‘ind al-zaydiyya p. 42.
67   Al-Miswarī, Al-Risāla al-munqidha, pp. 60–62.
68   Al-‘Izzī, ‘Ilm al-hadīth ‘ind al-zaydiyya, p. 271.

 69   Zayd b. ‘Alī, Musnad Zayd b. ‘Alī, p. 383.
70   Sārim al-Dīn Ibrāhīm al-Wazīr, Al-Falak al-dawwār fī ‘ulūm al-hadīth wa al-fiqh wa al-āthār, pp. 69, 222.
71   Al-‘Izzī, ‘Ilm al-hadīth ‘ind al-zaydiyya, p. 225.

 5
THE FUNCTION OF PROPHETIC TRADITIONS IN ISLAMIC LAW AND
LEGAL THEORY
THE AUTHORITY OF THE SUNNA IN LAW
All Muslims believe that the Quran is the primary source of Islamic law. Throughout Islamic
history, the vast preponderance of Muslims have also affirmed that the teachings of the Prophet
adjust, augment and explain the Holy Book, although they have disagreed on how and to what
extent it occurs. The Quran is not a detailed legal manual. Only about five hundred of the
book’s verses provide legal injunctions, and even on major questions such as ritual prayer the
Quran is often vague. For both Sunni and Shiite Islam, the Prophet’s Sunna has thus proven an
essential resource for explaining and supplementing the Quranic message. As the Companion
‘Imrān b. Husayn supposedly told a person who wanted to take religious law only from the
Holy Book and not from the Sunna, ‘Indeed you are an idiot, do you find in the Book of God
prayer explained!? Do you find in it fasting explained!? Indeed the Quran ordains this, but the
Sunna explains it.’1
As the lens through which the Quran was understood, the Sunna of the Prophet has controlled
the way in which Muslims have interpreted the Quranic revelation. Although no Muslim would
claim that the word of Muhammad is ontologically equal or superior to the word of God, early
Sunnis such as Yahyā b. Abī Kathīr (d. 129/747) long ago acknowledged that ‘The Sunna came
to rule over the Quran, it is not the Quran that rules over the Sunna.’2 This was not in any way
an admission of any deficiency in the Quran – rather it recognizes that the book required the
Prophet’s example and teachings in order to explain its verses and unlock its manifold
meanings to an evolving community. As many early Muslims such as Ayyūb al-Sakhtiyānī (d.
131/748) noted, ‘The Quran needs the Sunna more than the Sunna needs the Quran.’3 Muslim
schools of thought at various times have insisted, out of principle, that the words of a mere
mortal, even Muhammad, could never conceivably carry more interpretive weight than the
word of God. Yet they have all historically recognized that, whichever way one chooses to
phrase it, the Prophet’s legacy has profoundly informed and altered the way the Quran’s legal
message has been understood.
The word ‘Sunna,’ of course, is not fully synonymous with ‘hadith.’ In the first century and a
half of Islamic history, ‘sunna’ was often understood as the accepted set of practices and
beliefs of the Muslim community as passed on from the Companions. A ‘hadith’ was merely a
report from the Prophet that may or may not have actually been acted on as a rule in daily
Muslim life. Shu‘ba b. al-Hajjāj was thus considered a master of hadiths but not of sunna,
while Sufyān al-Thawrī (d. 161/778) was considered a master of both.4 We have already seen
that Mālik believed that the practice of the people of Medina, which he felt had been
transmitted en masse from the time of the Prophet, was a much more reliable source for
discovering the Prophet’s Sunna than a solitary hadith narrated by one isnād. By the time of

 Mālik’s student al-Shāfi‘ī, however, among the ahl al-hadīth a concerted study of hadiths had
become the essential route for learning and implementing the Sunna of the Prophet.
The importance of hadiths in the Sunni derivation of Islamic law is clear from the sources
from which the different Sunni schools of law drew. Hanafīs ranked the sources of law as 1)
the Quran, 2) sound hadiths, 3) Companion opinions, and 4) methods of legal reasoning based
on the Quran and Sunna. Al-Shāfi‘ī consulted 1) the Quran and reliable hadiths, 2) the
consensus of scholars, 3) Companion opinions, and 4) analogical reasoning based on the Quran
and Sunna. Mālikīs described their sources of law as 1) the Quran, 2) the Prophet’s Sunna,
which was understood through hadiths, Companion rulings, and the practice of Medina, 3)
consensus, 4) legal reasoning and communal needs. Hanbalīs described Ibn Hanbal’s sources
of law as 1) the Quran and reliable hadiths, 2) the consensus of the early community, 3)
Companion opinions, 4) weak hadiths, and 5) analogical reasoning based on the Quran and
Sunna.5
It is worth noting that accepting the Sunna and hadiths as an essential source of Islamic law
was not uncontested. In the first two centuries of Islam (and indeed, in the modern period as
well, see Chapter 10), there were schools of thought that rejected the use of hadiths in Islamic
law entirely. The works of al-Shāfi‘ī record his disputations with these scholars, known to
Sunnis as the ‘People of Speculative Theology (ahl al-kalām),’ who could not accept the idea
of taking their religion and its laws from reports transmitted merely ‘from so-and-so, from so-
and-so.’6 This was a function fit for something as historically reliable as the Quran alone. This
extreme skepticism towards hadiths, however, died out in classical Sunni and Shiite Islam,
although its traces will be seen below in the Mu‘tazilite approach to hadiths. Sunni Islam in
particular followed the reasoning with which al-Shāfi‘ī had confronted the ‘People of
Speculative Theology’: without the Sunna and hadiths, how could Muslims know the details of
prayer or of the Ramadan fast?7
THE INTERACTION OF THE SUNNA WITH THE QURAN IN LAW
Al-Shāfi‘ī offered a succinct description of the manner in which the Sunna could affect
interpretation of the Quran. First, the Prophet could demonstrate that the meaning of a general
Quranic verse was more specific than it appeared. The Quran, for example, states ‘The thief,
male or female, cut off their hand in retribution for what they have done, an exemplary
punishment from God, for God is mighty and wise’ (Quran 5:38). We learn from a hadith
narrated from the Prophet by Aisha, however, that we should ‘not cut off someone’s hand for
an item whose value is less than a quarter dinar’ (1/4 dinar is approximately $25). From
other hadiths we learn that the punishment also does not apply in cases of stealing things from
unsecured locations, embezzlement or taking things publicly.8 The Sunna also clarified
ambiguous or vague Quranic commands. The Quran orders Muslims to pray and fast, but only
the Sunna explains how these rituals are performed. The Sunna could also abrogate or add
entirely new information to the Quran. The Quran forbids Muslims from eating carrion, but in a
famous hadith the Prophet approves of a group of Muslims who had eaten the meat of a dead
whale they had found on the beach, for he reminds them that everything that comes from the sea

 is permissible to eat. Hadiths also inform Muslims that they can eat dead grasshoppers they
find. The Quran forbids men from marrying their mothers, sisters, daughters, or aunts (with the
corresponding male relationships for women implied as well), saying that women ‘other than
these are permissible’ (Quran 4:24). Hadiths add that a man cannot marry a woman and her
aunt at the same time.
Traditional Sunni scholars have uniformly rejected the hadith, invoked by Mu‘tazilites, that
orders Muslims to reject hadiths that differ with the Quran. As al-Shāfi‘ī said, such an idea
was ‘pure ignor-ance,’ since the purpose of hadiths was to explain, modify, and add to the
Quran. Hadiths could thus by definition break with the evident meaning of Quranic verses.
Coming from the ahl al-ra’y tradition, the Hanafīs also recognized these interactions between
the Sunna and the Quran, although as we will see they maintained different standards for when
hadiths could fulfill these functions. Hanafī legal theorists discussed how hadiths could
reinforce Quranic rulings (called an ‘affirming indication,’ or bayān taqrīr), add explanatory
information to a Quranic ruling (called an ‘explanatory indication,’ or bayān tafsīr), or replace
and restrict a Quranic ruling (called an ‘abrogating indication,’ or bayān tabdīl).’9
DIFFERENT CONDITIONS FOR THE USE OF HADITHS IN LAW
The ahl al-hadīth movement (the original core of Sunni Islam) was built on the premise that a
report established as coming from the Prophet was legally compelling. As al-Shāfi‘ī famously
stated, ‘If the hadith is reliable, then that is my ruling (in sahha al-hadīth fa-hādhā
madhhabī).’10 Both sahīh and hasan hadiths were considered admissible in law, and we have
seen that early ahl al-hadīth jurists like Ibn Hanbal sometimes acted on weak hadiths if they
could find no other evidence whatsoever on a particular issue.
When Sunni legal theory matured in the eleventh century, it was accepted that, although āhād
(i.e., non-massively transmitted) hadiths did not yield epistemological certainty (yaqīn) that the
Prophet had made that statement, they did yield a very strong probability (zann). This was
sufficient for fixing law and ritual. While almost all legal hadiths were āhād, the Quran was
epistemologically certain, massively transmitted from the time of the Prophet. This posed a
problem for proponents of the majority Ash‘arī school of legal theory (subscribed to by
Shāfi‘ī, Mālikī, and many Hanbalī scholars). These legal theorists could not accept that an
āhād hadith, which conveyed mere probability, could replace a Quranic ruling. They therefore
rejected the doctrine that āhād hadiths could abrogate (naskh) the Quran. But if this were the
case, then how could they explain rulings such as allowing eating dead fish or the prohibition
on marrying a woman and her aunt? As the Ash‘arī legal theorist Ibn Fūrak (d. 406/1015)
cleverly explained, this was possible because such a ruling could be phrased as an āhād hadith
specifying or adjusting Quranic verses, not replacing their rulings.11
The various groups that made up the Partisans of Legal Reasoning (ahl al-ra’y) also
accepted the compelling power of hadiths. In principle, no Muslim could argue that the
Prophet’s words merited anything short of obedience. Abū Hanīfa is quoted as saying,
‘Whoever says that we prefer our own legal reasoning (qiyās) to a revealed text [from the
Prophet] has lied, by God, and defamed us. For what need is there for legal reasoning in the

 presence of such a text!?’12 The crux of the difference between the ahl al-hadīth and the ahl al-
ra’y was how one determined if a hadith was reliable enough to be accepted in law.
As a rule, the Hanafī school of law does not allow hadiths to abrogate or specify the evident
meaning of Quranic verses unless the report is mashhūr (widespread and accepted by jurists).
They viewed specification (takhsīs) of a Quranic verse as a form of abrogation (naskh) of the
holy book and therefore did not permit it by āhād hadiths. For example, the other three Sunni
schools of law require a Muslim to have the intention to perform his ritual ablutions before he
starts washing on the basis of the famous hadith ‘Indeed deeds are [judged] by intentions
(innamā al-a‘māl bi’l-niyyāt).’ But because this hadith is only narrated by one solitary chain
of transmission for four stages in the isnād (Prophet 
‘Umar b. al-Khattāb 
 ‘Alqama b.
Waqqās 
 Muhammad b. Ibrāhīm 
 Yahyā b. Sa‘īd al-Ansārī), the Hanafīs do not consider it
widespread enough to adjust the Quran, which simply instructs Muslims to wash certain parts
of their bodies for ablutions (Quran 5:6). For Hanafīs, then, one can take a shower and then
retroactively count that as one’s ablutions even if one had not intended to do so while
showering.
In the case of a hadith that is not widely enough transmitted to be deemed mashhūr, Hanafīs
do not accept it in legal discussions if it deals with a case of ‘umūm al-balwā, or an issue of
great importance to Islamic law. If the issue addressed by the hadith were crucial for Muslims’
understanding of their religion, then God and His prophet would have assured that it was
transmitted by more reliable means. Hanafīs also do not accept a non-mashhūr hadith if the
early scholars who transmitted it did not act according to its ruling. If the hadith truly
represented the Prophet’s Sunna, then why would a pious narrator not follow it? Finally, until
the 1000s CE many Hanafī jurists favored their own legal reasoning over a non-mashhūr
hadith if its transmitters were not considered skilled in legal analysis. A hadith from Sahīh al-
Bukhārī quotes the Prophet permitting parties in a sales transaction to change their minds up
until ‘the two part company.’ Although accepted as a rule in the Shāfi‘ī and Hanbalī schools,
this broke with the Hanafī school’s principle that sales are finalized upon agreement, barring
some fraud or defect. Hanafīs did not reject this hadith outright. Rather, they turned to
comments on it by the Kufan authority Ibrāhīm al-Nakha‘ī (d. 96/717), who explained that
‘parting company’ was understood not in the physical sense but as the verbal end of the
negotiation.13
The Mālikī school of law was also considered by some to be part of the ahl al-ra’y
movement. It is very difficult, however, to determine exactly what the early Mālikī stance on
hadiths was. Mālik himself often rejected hadiths that contradicted the practice of the people of
Medina. For example, Mālik also did not act on the evident meaning of the ‘parting company’
hadith because it was not acted on in Medina. He also took the meaning of ‘parting company’
as ending the negotiation. Mālik also chose not to act on hadiths that he recognized as reliable
if he feared they would lead to misunderstandings or facilitate prohibited acts (a concept
known as sadd al-dharā’i‘, or ‘blocking means’). He did not allow acting on a sahīh hadith
that recommended that Muslims fast for six days in the month immediately following the
obligatory month-long fast of Ramadan because he feared people would confuse this optional

 fast with the required one.14
The Mu‘tazilite school of theology and legal theory, of course, retained the most rigorous
standards for accepting hadiths for use in law. According to later Mu‘tazilites, the founder of
the school, Wāsil b. ‘Atā’ (d. 131/750), would only accept hadiths if they were agreed upon as
authentic by the whole community of scholars.15 For matters of law, the Mu‘tazilite master Abū
Hudhayl (d. 200/815) required a hadith to have four separate narrations, although later
members of the school required only two.16
WEAK HADITHS AND PRACTICE: DIFFERENT PROOFS FOR THE AUTHENTICITY OF LEGAL HADITHS
During the formative first three centuries of the Sunni legal tradition, there was a diversity of
approaches to weighing the evidence provided by isnāds against the accepted practice of legal
scholars. Despite their obsession with the isnād as the only means of authenticating hadiths,
early ahl al-hadīth jurists affirmed that the widespread acceptance of a legal ruling could
offset a lackluster isnād. In such a case, it is actually the accepted practice of Muslim scholars
that justifies the ruling. The hadith only embodies it in the Prophetic word. The Quran specifies
certain family relations who automatically inherit if a family member dies (Quran 4:11–12). In
a hadith that appears in the Four Sunans of al-Tirmidhī, al-Nasā’ī, Abū Dāwūd and Ibn Mājah,
the Prophet states that ‘The killer does not inherit,’ meaning that if someone murders someone
from whom they stand to inherit, they will not inherit anything. Despite being widely quoted,
al-Tirmidhī notes that ‘this hadith is not sound,’ an opinion with which later critics agree. Yet
al-Tirmidhī adds, ‘practice has been based on this hadith amongst the people of knowledge.’
Indeed, though this hadith is the only scriptural basis for this position, the ruling has been
agreed upon by all schools of law in Islam.17
Another famous example occurs in the case of inheritance as well. The Quran and hadiths set
detailed regulations for how much a person must leave to each of his or her inheritors – a
person can distribute no more than one third of the estate to people of his or her own choosing.
In a famous hadith, however, the Prophet declares, ‘No bequest to an inheritor unless the
inheritors all agree (lā wasiyya li-wārith illā in shā’a al-waratha)’; in other words, one
cannot leave part of this third to someone who already inherits automatically. Every one of the
many narrations of this hadith suffers from some flaw in the isnād according to Muslim hadith
critics. But as al-Shāfi‘ī and the Mālikī hadith scholar of Lisbon, Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr (d.
463/1070), declared, ‘With reports like this that became well established among all the
scholars, it is not necessary to provide an isnād. For its widespread transmission and well-
known status among them is stronger than any isnād.’18
Some also maintained that juridical mastery obviated the need to cite an isnād at all. From
the early Islamic period onward, jurists from the Hanafī school held that a competent scholar
of the early period need not provide an isnād for a hadith he cited. Unlike the Partisans of
Hadith, they therefore considered mursal hadiths (hadiths in which an early scholar such as a
Successor quoted the Prophet without an isnād, see Chapter 3) to be acceptable proofs in legal
discourse. They argued that when Abū Hanīfa cited the Prophet’s words or deeds as legal
proof without providing any isnād, this was because he was so confident in the authenticity of

 the hadith that he did not bother with a chain of transmission.19 In addition, in the time of Abū
Hanīfa (who was considered a Successor because he had seen the Companion Anas b. Mālik
as a boy) it had not become predominate practice for scholars to provide isnāds. Mālik thus
frequently included mursal hadiths in his Muwatta’.
Al-Shāfi‘ī, however, led the Partisans of Hadith attack on mursal hadiths and insisted on
providing an isnād in order to prove the reliability of one’s hadith. He stated that he had
examined the mursal hadiths in circulation and found that only those of the senior Successor
Sa‘īd b. al-Musayyab were reliable, since it was assumed that he had heard them all through
his father-in-law Abū Hurayra.20 Because there was a break in the isnāds of mursal hadiths, the
ahl al-hadīth considered them to be unreliable. Scholars from the Shāfi‘ī and Hanbalī schools
of law thus only used mursal hadiths as evidence if they came from Sa‘īd b. al-Musayyab,
when they were backed up by the legal rulings of Companions or to tip the balance in the case
of two competing hadiths.21
THE EVOLVING USE OF HADITHS IN THE SUNNI SCHOOLS OF LAW
Although hadiths have played an undeniably crucial role in constructing Islamic law, that role
has not remained static since the early period of Muslim legal thought. As we saw in the
musannaf period, early legal scholars like Mālik b. Anas relied on Companion opinions and
the rulings of early jurists from the Successor generation more often than Prophetic hadiths.
Companion opinions and analogical legal reasoning ranked highly among the sources of law
that the Shāfi‘ī, Mālikī, Hanafī, and Hanbalī schools identified. By the ninth century, however,
it had become necessary for schools of law to find Prophetic hadiths to justify their stances. In
his massive book of substantive law, the Umm, al-Shāfi‘ī had cited only about four thousand
three hundred hadiths with full isnāds to the Prophet as evidence. The eleventh-century Shāfi‘ī
scholar Abū Bakr al-Bayhaqī, however, filled his massive Sunan al-kubrā (The Great Sunan)
with over twenty thousand narrations from the Prophet in order to back up every detail of
Shāfi‘ī law.
The history of Sunni legal thought, however, was not a linear process of collecting more and
more hadiths to justify a certain legal position. The Sunni schools of law were evolving
interpretive traditions that presented evidence in different ways depending on their needs. Each
madhhab (school of law) represented a tradition of transmitting, explaining, reexamining,
adjusting and adapting the body of law originated by its founding figures.
In the case of the Hanbalī school of law, for example, the legal opinions given by Ibn Hanbal
were collected from his senior students by Abū Bakr b. al-Khallāl (d. 311/923–4). His student
al-Khiraqī (d. 334/945–6) sifted through the many and sometimes seemingly contradictory
opinions of Ibn Hanbal, attempting to place each one in its proper context. His work, known as
the Mukhtasar (The Abridgement), was the foundational text of the Hanbalī school.
Later scholars transformed this work to fit various needs. Ibn Qudāma (d. 620/1223), for
example, channeled the Mukhtasar into four works of increasing size and complexity: the
‘Umda (The Pillar), designed to introduce students of the school to its principal rulings; the
Muqni‘ (The Convincing Book), which introduced Hanbalī students to the various differences

 of opinion among the school’s major figures; the Kāfī (The Sufficient Book), which introduced
students to the evidence and argumentation for these positions; and finally the huge Mughnī
(The Obviating Book), which added more evidence and the opinions of other schools of law as
well. The Muqni‘ was digested by Mūsā al-Hajjāwī (d. 968/1560) into a small and easily
memorized text called the Zād al-mustaqni‘ (Provisions for One Seeking Certainty), which
provided the official Hanbalī stances on issues of law. This work was then explained by
Mansūr al-Buhūtī (d. 1051/1641) in his al-Rawd al-murbi‘ (The Abundant Garden), in which
the author expanded the work and also provided the reader with evidence for its rulings.
In these works, the Hanbalī school’s use of hadiths expanded and contracted according to the
purpose of a particular book. We can see this clearly in the example of the Hanbalī position on
how someone should pray if he is too weak to stand or even sit up straight: he should lie on his
side facing the direction of prayer, nodding with his head to represent the normal bowings and
prostrations of prayer. The Mukhtasar of al-Khiraqī does not concern itself with providing
evidence on this – it merely seeks to identify Ibn Hanbal’s stances on legal issues. The lengthy
Mughnī of Ibn Qudāma, however, provides a myriad of Quranic verses, hadiths, and early
scholarly opinions to justify Ibn Hanbal’s choice. We find Ibn Qudāma citing a hadith that Ibn
Hanbal had included in his famous Musnad: The Prophet said to ‘Imrān b. Husayn: ‘Pray
standing, and if you cannot, then sitting, and if you cannot, then on your side (salli
qā’iman wa in lam tastati‘ fa-qā‘idan wa in lam tastati‘ fa-‘alā janb).’ This was excellent
evidence for the Hanbalī opinion, since the hadith had been included in the Sahīhayn and was
thus extremely reliable. Ibn Qudāma also lists other hadiths transmitted by al-Nasā’ī that add
that the person should lie down fully if unable to lie on his side.22
Centuries later, however, when al-Buhūtī was providing evidence for the Hanbalī position in
his Rawd al-murbī‘, he omitted these reliable hadiths and instead used an otherwise very weak
hadith from the Sunan of al-Dāraqutnī. The reason for this was clear: this one hadith lays out
the Hanbalī position word for word! It reads:
 
The Prophet said: The sick person should pray standing if he can. If he cannot, he should pray sitting down. If he
is unable to prostrate, he gestures with his head and makes the gesture of prostration lower than the gesture
representing bowing. If he is unable to pray sitting, he should pray on his right side facing the direction of
prayer, and if he is unable to do that he should lie with his legs facing the direction of prayer.23
 
In the Mughnī, Ibn Qudāma sought to collect the most reliable hadiths as evidence to support
the Hanbalī school. For al-Buhūtī, the school’s position was already justified. He only wanted
to provide his reader with one concise piece of evidence that summarized it even if that hadith
was unreliable.
IKHTILĀF AL-HADĪTH: DISAGREEMENT AND DIFFERING INTERPRETATION OF HADITHS AMONG JURISTS
The Prophet taught thousands of followers, interacted with his community for twenty-three
years, and acted as a judge and political leader for the last ten. As a result, sifting through his
Companions’ sundry recollections of his words in order to determine his precedent (Sunna)
was a monumental task. The vast number and complex meaning of the hadiths with which

 jurists had to contend in their attempts to derive Islamic law made the hadith tradition fertile
ground for disagreement and varying interpretations.
Even a cursory reading of major hadith collections illustrates the difficulty of reaching
definitive conclusions based on hadiths. In al-Tirmidhī’s Jāmi‘, for example, we find one
section listing hadiths forbidding drinking while standing up followed by another section with
hadiths describing how the Companions saw the Prophet drinking while standing up! In
addition to determining which hadiths to act on, a Muslim scholar had to place these hadiths
within the framework of Quranic injunctions and the specific interests of the Muslim
community. A common saying among Muslim scholars thus identifies hadith critics with
pharmacists, who provide the medicine, and legal scholars with doctors, who know how to use
this medicine properly.24
Disagreement was often the outcome of limited access. As we have seen, in its first two
centuries the hadith tradition was highly localized. In Medina, Mālik did not have access to the
same hadiths as Abū Hanīfa in Kufa. These two jurists were thus working from different
bodies of hadiths. Al-Shāfi‘ī is reported to have said that the hadiths that provide the basis for
all legal rulings (usūl al-ahkām) are only fifty or so in number. He adds that his teacher Mālik
only had thirty, while his teacher Sufyān b. ‘Uyayna (d. 196/811) in Mecca had all but six.25
Assuming that scholars had access to the same hadiths, what are the factors that could lead
Muslim jurists to reach different legal conclusions on their basis? Why might a scholar ignore
a hadith or take one over another? The fourteenth-century analyst Ibn Taymiyya (d. 728/1328)
explained that disagreements over the Prophet’s Sunna as communicated by the hadith literature
revolved around three points.26
First, a scholar might not have thought that a certain hadith was reliable. Instead, he might
have chosen another narration over it. For an example, let us turn to al-Tirmidhī’s Jāmi‘, which
documented legal disagreement as well as hadiths. In his section on how one should say
‘Amen’ in prayer, al-Tirmidhī writes:
 
It was reported to us by Bundār Muhammad b. Bashshār: it was reported to us by Yahyā b. Sa‘īd al-Qattān and ‘Abd al-
Rahmān b. Mahdī: it was reported to us by Sufyān, from Salama b. Kuhayl, from Hujr b. ‘Anbas, from Wā’il b. Hujr: he
said, ‘I heard the Prophet read [the Quranic verse in prayer] “And not those rejected by God nor those who
have gone astray” and then he said, “Amen,” stretching out his words.’ And on that issue there are also hadiths
from ‘Alī b. Abī Tālib and Abū Hurayra.
The hadith of Wā’il b. Hujr is a hasan hadith, and that is the position of more than one of the people of knowledge from
among the Companions of the Prophet, the Successors and those after them. They hold that a person raises his voice in
saying ‘Amen’ and does not say it silently. This is the opinion of al-Shāfi‘ī, Ahmad b. Hanbal and Ishāq b. Rāhawayh.
But Shu‘ba b. al-Hajjāj narrated this hadith from Salama b. Kuhayl, from Hujr b. al-‘Anbas, from ‘Alqama b. Wā’il, from
his father, that ‘the Prophet read [the verse] “Not those rejected by God nor those who have gone astray,” and
said “Amen” but lowered his voice.’
I heard Muhammad [al-Bukhārī] say, ‘the first hadith, [that] of Sufyān, is more authentic than the [second] hadith, [that]
of Shu‘ba on that issue. And Shu‘ba erred at several points in the hadith, saying “from Hujr b. al-‘Anbas”, when it is really
‘Hujr b. ‘Anbas … and he added in the hadith “from ‘Alqama b. Wā’il” when that is not part of the hadith’s [isnād].
Rather it is “from Hujr b. ‘Anbas, from Wā’il b. Hujr.” Finally, [Shu‘ba] said, “and he lowered his voice,” when really it is
“and he extended his voice in saying Amen.”
I asked Abū Zur‘a [al-Rāzī] about that hadith and he said, ‘Sufyān’s hadith on that issue is more authentic than
Shu‘ba’s.’ He added, ‘And there is [a hadith of] al-‘Alā’ b. Sālih al-Asadī, from Salama b. Kuhayl, like the narration of
Sufyān. It was reported to us by Abū Bakr Muhammad b. Abān: it was reported to us by ‘Abdallāh b. Numayr: it was

 reported to us by al-‘Alā’ b. Sālih al-Asadī, from Salama b. Kuhayl, from Hujr b. ‘Anbas, from Wā’il b. Hujr, from the
Prophet, the likes of Sufyān’s hadith, from Salama b. Kuhayl.’27
 
Here we see the debate surrounding two narrations of the same hadith, one through Sufyān,
from Salama b. Kuhayl, which describes the Prophet saying ‘Amen’ out loud during prayer;
and one through Shu‘ba, from Salama b. Kuhayl that says the opposite. Jurists like al-Shāfi‘ī
and Ibn Hanbal chose Sufyān’s narration, which describes the Prophet saying ‘Amen’ out loud,
rejecting Shu‘ba’s version. Al-Tirmidhī provides the opinions of the influential hadith critics
al-Bukhārī and Abū Zur‘a al-Rāzī to explain why: Shu‘ba’s narration includes an error (a very
minor one!) in the name of the transmitters and adds another transmitter incorrectly into the
isnād. More import-antly, al-‘Alā’ b. Sālih al-Asadī’s narration of the hadith from Salama b.
Kuhayl corroborates Sufyān’s narration of ‘Amen’ being said out loud. The hadith scholars’
critical method, focusing on the reliability of the isnād and corroboration, thus led many jurists
to uphold saying ‘Amen’ out loud in prayer.
Second, a jurist might conclude that one hadith had abrogated another one, annulling and
replacing its ruling. All hadith scholars and jurists acknowledged an authentic hadith in which
the Prophet instructed Muslims to perform ablutions after eating food cooked by fire. Al-Suyūtī
even declared it mutawātir.28 Sunni scholars, however, agreed on hadiths transmitted by Ibn
‘Abbās and Abū Bakr that during the last few years of his life in Medina the Prophet had been
served a cooked lamb shoulder and then had prayed his afternoon prayer without performing
ablutions. The Companions therefore understood that the earlier requirement for ablutions had
been nullified.29
Several hadith scholars penned books devoted to listing and analyzing hadiths that abrogated
or were abrogated. Ibn Hanbal’s student Abū Bakr Ahmad al-Athram (d. 261/875) wrote his
Nāsikh al-hadīth wa mansūkhuhu (Abrogating and Abrogated Hadiths), Ibn Shāhīn (d.
385/996) of Baghdad and Abū Bakr al-Hāzimī (d. 584/1188–89) also wrote large and widely
studied works on hadith abrogation.
Finally, a jurist might not have thought that a hadith addressed a particular issue or may have
weighed it against other evidence in a manner that differed from other jurists. We have already
seen that Hanafīs did not allow hadiths to modify or abrogate Quranic rulings unless they were
well established. This led Hanafīs to break with the other Sunni schools of law in not requiring
Muslims to declare their intentions before performing ritual ablutions. Mālik, for his part,
favored the practice of Medinans over many hadiths. In the case of the apparent contradiction
between hadiths in which the Prophet instructed his followers not to drink while standing up
and hadiths describing the Prophet doing just that, many jurists understood this as meaning that
drinking standing up was discouraged but nonetheless permissible.30
The context in which a hadith appeared could have tremendous impact in its implications. We
find, for example, two narrations of a hadith narrated from ‘Urwa b. al-Zubayr, from his aunt
Aisha, from the Prophet. In one the Prophet states ‘Whoever is tried by having daughters and
perseveres with them, they will veil him from the Hellfire [on the Day of Judgment].’ This
report does not leave a very positive impression of daughters! In the second narration,
however, we find illuminating details. Aisha recounts how ‘A woman entered asking me [for

 food] and had two daughters with her. But all I had with me was a date, so I gave it to her, and
she split it between her two daughters without eating any herself. When the Prophet came I told
him of this, and he said, ‘Whoever is tried by these daughters, they will be a veil from
Hellfire [on the Day of Judgment].’31
In the modern period, context has strongly informed the use of another gender-related hadith.
In his defense of women’s right to hold public office, the Egyptian scholar Muhammad al-
Ghazālī (d. 1996) noted that the majority of classical scholars had objected to women serving
as judges on the basis of the sahīh hadith, ‘The people who entrust their affairs to a woman
will not succeed (lan yufliha qawm wallū amrahum imra’a).’ Al-Ghazālī, however, retorts
that the context in which this hadith was said clarifies its meaning. The Persian Sassanid
Empire was experiencing internal political crises as well as military defeats at the hands of the
Byzantines. In the midst of this trouble, the Sassanids brought a woman to the throne. The
Prophet was merely noting that this would not prevent the empire’s downfall.32
Ever creative, Jalāl al-Dīn al-Suyūtī (d. 911/1505) wrote a book on the ‘reasons for the
appearance of hadiths’ (Asbāb wurūd al-hadīth¸ the book had that same title), as did Ibrāhīm
b. Hamza (d. 1708). These books, however, did not introduce any new information about
hadiths. The context and motivations for the Prophet’s statements were already found either
within hadith collections or in commentaries on these works. Books like al-Suyūtī’s simply
culled that information from these sources and reorganized it.
The different reasons for disagreement over interpreting hadiths could coincide. Al-Shāfi‘ī
described how scholars should address such situations. In a case of clashing hadiths, one
should first examine which hadiths have the most reliable isnāds. First, he states unequivocally
that no two reliable hadiths can be contradictory, since it is impossible for the Prophet to have
an inconsistent Sunna. Instead, one must determine the proper relationship between the
contrasting hadiths. Al-Shāfi‘ī states that hadiths that convey different rulings on an issue may
indicate that the Prophet intended there to be latitude and flexibility. If this is not the case, then
the one hadith might address certain circumstances and the second one other circumstances. If
neither of these options is possible, one hadith must abrogate the other. The scholars who
emerged amongst the early generations of Muslims were key resources in fitting the data
provided by individual, reliable hadiths into a coherent system. As Abū Dāwūd wrote in his
Sunan, ‘If two reports from the Messenger of God clash, one looks to what the Companions
and those who came after them acted on.’33
We can see the way in which reconciliation and abrogation interacted in the question of ‘the
Two Prostrations of Error (sajdatā al-sahw).’ When Muslims perform their canonical prayer –
done five times daily – their prayers consist of a fixed cycle of actions and utterances including
bowing, prostrations, and kneeling. In the last prayer cycle of the prayer, the worshipper
performs the ‘Taslīm’, or turning one’s head to the right and left and saying ‘May the peace and
mercy of God be upon you (al-salām ‘alaykum wa rahmat Allāh)’ to the person to the right and
left. This marks the end of the prayer. If a worshipper errs in the proper procedures of the
prayer, they can touch their foreheads to the ground twice while seated at the end of the prayer.
These two prostrations are called ‘The Two Prostrations of Error.’

 The Shāfi‘ī school holds that these prostrations should be done before the Taslīm, while
Hanafīs maintain that they should be performed afterwards. Mālikīs and Hanbalīs take more
subtle positions. The following is al-Tirmidhī’s discussion of the different hadiths dealing with
this issue and the different ways that scholars have interpreted them. He mentions a hadith
affirming that the Two Prostrations are made before the Taslīm, only alluding to another famous
one in which the Prophet prays them afterwards:
 
It was reported to us by Qutayba [b. Sa‘īd]: it was reported to us by al-Layth [b. Sa‘d], from Ibn Shihāb [al-Zuhrī], from al-
A‘raj, from ‘Abdallāh b. Bujayna al-Asadī, associate of the Banū ‘Abd al-Muttalib [family], that the Prophet stood up in the
Noon prayer when he should have remained seated, so when he finished his prayer he prostrated twice, saying ‘God is
most great (Allāhu akbar)’ for both prostrations, before saying the final Taslīm [to exit the prayer]. And the congregation
following the Prophet in prayer did the same as him. He had done this to make up for forgetting to remain seated during
part of the prayer.
…
The hadīth of Ibn Bujayna is a hasan sahīh hadith, and it is acted on by some of the people of knowledge, being the
opinion of al-Shāfi‘ī. He holds that the Prostrations of Error are always before the Taslīm, saying that this hadith abrogates
the other hadiths on this issue. Al-Shāfi‘ī mentions that this hadith represents the practice of the Prophet in the last stage of
his career. Ahmad Ibn Hanbal and Ishāq b. Rāhawayh say that if someone stands up in prayer in the midst of his normal
two prostrations he should perform the two Prostrations of Error before the Taslīm as per the hadith of Ibn Bujayna.
The scholars have disagreed on when one should perform the two Prostrations of Error, before the Taslīm or after it?
Some hold that one should perform them after the Taslīm; this is the position of Sufyān al-Thawrī and the Kufans [in other
words, the Hanafīs]. Some have said ‘before the Taslīm,’ and this is the position of most the Medinan jurists like Yahyā b.
Sa‘īd, Rabī‘a [al-Ra’y] and others. This is the opinion of al-Shāfi‘ī.
Others have said that if the mistake is adding something to the prayer then the Prostration of Error is after the Taslīm,
and if it is an error of omission then before the Taslīm. This is the opinion of Mālik b. Anas.
Ahmad Ibn Hanbal said, ‘All the hadiths related from the Prophet concerning the two Prostrations of Error should be
employed, each according to its specific context.’ He sees that when the Prophet stood up incorrectly in the hadith of Ibn
Bujayna, he prayed the two Prostrations before the Taslīm. When the Prophet accidentally prayed five prayer cycles
during the Noon prayer (which consists of four) he prayed the two Prostrations after the Taslīm. And when the Prophet
accidentally said the Taslīm after only two prayer cycles in the four-prayer-cycle Noon or Afternoon prayers, he did the
two Prostrations after the Taslīm. So every report is acted on according to its specific context, and every error in prayer
that is not mentioned in one of these hadiths, then the two Prostrations of Error should be before the Taslīm.34
 
On this issue, we see that al-Shāfi‘ī concluded that the hadith of the Prophet performing the two
Prostrations of Error before the Taslīm abrogated all earlier hadiths and represented the
Prophet’s final Sunna. Mālik and Ibn Hanbal, however, attempted to reconcile the contrasting
hadiths on the issue.
Several influential works were devoted to examining and attempting to reconcile seemingly
contradictory hadiths. The first and most famous was al-Shāfi‘ī’s Ikhtilāf al-hadīth. The
Hanafī scholar Abū Ja‘far al-Tahāwī (d. 321/933) also wrote his voluminous Sharh mushkil
al-āthār. Ibn Qutayba (d. 276/889) devoted his Ta’wīl mukhtalif al-hadīth to defending and
reconciling hadiths that Mu‘tazilites had dismissed as contradictory or irrational.
THE FUNCTION OF HADITHS IN ISLAMIC LEGAL THEORY
Hadiths did not just provide much of the substance of Islamic law, they also informed the
theories through which that law was understood and derived. The Prophet’s legacy shaped the
manner in which Muslim legal theorists discussed law and epistemology, and these theorists

 also turned to hadiths as justification for their own ideas. In Chapter 3 we saw how Islamic
legal theory (usūl al-fiqh) affected hadith criticism. Now let us examine how hadiths
influenced Islamic legal theory. Interestingly, many of the most important hadiths in legal theory
are considered weak (da‘īf) by Muslim hadith critics.
Genealogy of Knowledge and the Transmission of Authority from the Prophet
The Sunni tradition portrays itself as a genealogy of transmission in which each generation of
scholars inherits its knowledge and methods of reasoning from its teachers. Paralleling the
isnād exactly, this chain continues back to the Prophet. It is this transmission from teacher to
student that creates and passes on interpretive authority.
The hadith that expressed this worldview and was frequently invoked to bolster it was
narrated from the Prophet by the Companion Abū Dardā’ and is found in the three sunans of
Abū Dāwūd, al-Tirmidhī, and Ibn Mājah: ‘Indeed the scholars are the inheritors of the
prophets (al-‘ulamā’ warathat al-anbiyā’).’ Books in the Sunni tradition (written, of course,
by members of the scholarly class) frequently refer to the ulema by this honorific. The great
thirteenth- century Sufi master Abū Hafs al-Suhrawardī (d. 632/1234) wrote to one of the most
vaunted legal theorists of his day, Fakhr al-Dīn al-Rāzī (d. 606/1210), that the religious
knowledge of the Muslim scholars is ‘the greatest inheritance. For earthly inheritors received
the inheritance of the world according to the rules of the people of the earthly world, while the
prophets bequeath as their legacy divine wisdom. So know that, just as there is no station
higher than that of prophethood, there is no honor above that of those who inherit this station.’35
Even the early scholar of the Successors, Abū al-Zinād (d. 130/748), used to tell his students
that, just as the Quran ordered Muslims not to raise their voices over that of Muhammad,
‘Silence in the presence of the scholars and respecting them is incumbent upon those learning,
for the scholars are the inheritors of the prophets.’36 This hadith thus served to justify the
Muslim scholarly class’s role as the sole interpreters of the Prophet’s message. Interestingly,
most scholars, such as al-Suyūtī, consider this hadith to be weak.37 Ibn Hajar, however, notes
that there are enough reports conveying this meaning to prove that the hadith has some basis in
the Prophet’s speech.38
The Companions were the first essential link in the Sunni genealogy of knowledge. They
transmitted the Prophet’s legacy in the form of hadiths. Moreover, in their own approaches to
questions of law and dogma the Companions demonstrated the principles and methods of
reasoning of the early Muslims. The Companions were the medium and lens through which the
Prophet’s teachings passed on to later generations. Not only were the actual legal rulings of
senior Companions such as ‘Alī, ‘Umar, and Zayd b. Thābit an important legal source for later
scholars like Abū Hanīfa and al-Shāfi‘ī, but the Sunni worldview and notion of religious
authority depended on a veneration of the Companions. If they could not be trusted, then how
could one have confidence in the Shariah?
A hadith commonly employed to affirm the Companions’ suitability as the conduit for the
transmission of this legal authority was ‘My Companions are like the stars, which ever of
them you follow, you will be rightly guided (ashābī ka’l-nujūm bi-ayyihim iqtadaytum

 ihtadaytum).’ This hadith was commonly found in books of legal theory in order to prove that
any Companion was a worthy representative of the Prophet’s legal teachings. Both the ahl al-
hadīth and ahl al-ra’y bent the hadith to their own purposes, however. Al-Shāfi‘ī’s student al-
Muzanī (d. 264/878), who wrote the most important abridgement of al-Shāfi‘ī’s Umm,
contended that it meant that the Companions were all upstanding hadith transmitters.39 The
Hanafī legal theorist Fakhr al-Islām al-Bazdawī (d. 482/1089) argued that the hadith
demonstrates that, like the Companions, Muslim scholars should employ their individual legal
reasoning (ra’y).40 Yet this hadith is also considered unreliable or even forged by Muslim
hadith critics.
The manner in which these hadiths about the inheritance of knowledge in Islam were woven
together by scholars can be seen in a work of the Damascene scholar Ibn Taymiyya (d.
728/1328), who wrote that, after believing in God and the Prophet, it is the duty of all Muslims
to follow the scholars ‘who are the inheritors of the prophets and whom God made like the
stars, by whom one seeks guidance on land and sea.’41
The Authoritative Consensus of the Muslim Community (ijmā‘)
The most powerful expression of authority in the Sunni tradition is not the Quran or even the
Prophet’s Sunna. Rather, it is ijmā‘, or the consensus of the community. As an adage of Cairo’s
al-Azhar University puts it, ‘Consensus is the stable pillar on which the religion depends (al-
ijmā‘ al-rukn al-rakīn yastanidu ilayhi al-dīn).’ If the Sunna controls the interpretation of the
Quran, then consensus controls the interpretation of the Sunna. In the controversial modern
debate over whether or not Islam requires Muslim women to wear headscarves, some argue
that this law is not found in the Quran and that the hadiths ordering it are not reliable. But since
the community of Sunni scholars has historically declared that it is ‘agreed upon by consensus’
that the headscarf is required, arguing otherwise means breaking with the Sunni schools of law.
The role of ijmā‘ in Islamic law began in the early Islamic period. The Successor al-Musayyab
b. Rāfi‘ (d. 105/723–4) stated, for example:
 
The community, if an event occurred for which they could find no reports from the Prophet, would come together on it and
reach a consensus. And the truth was in what they agreed on, the truth was in what they agreed on.42
 
Consensus received more formal justifications in books of legal theory. Because the Quran did
not provide any unambiguous evidence that the consensus of the Muslims was authoritative,
scholars turned to hadiths. One of the most commonly cited proofs is a famous hadith, the most
well-known version of which can be found in the Sunan of al-Tirmidhī through Ibn ‘Umar, that
the Prophet said, ‘Indeed God most high will not bring my community together on an error,
and the hand of God is over the collective, and who splits away splits away into the
Hellfire (Inna Allāh ta‘ālā lā yajma‘u ummatī ‘alā dalāla wa yad Allāh ‘alā al-jamā‘a, wa
man shadhdha shadhdha ilā al-nār).’43 Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalānī notes that ‘this is a well-known
hadith narrated via many paths, but none of them are free of some criticism,’ although al-Suyūtī
declares the hadith to be hasan because of its many narrations.44
In addition to such criticisms of the hadith, legal theorists actually found themselves in an

 even direr predicament: an āhād hadith such as this one did not yield the certainty that scholars
required to establish an important principle of legal theory. Unfortunately, the usual tool that
Sunni legal theorists used to turn an āhād hadith into absolute certainty was to claim that the
community had come to consensus on its accuracy! Since Sunni scholars were at risk of lapsing
into circular reasoning here, legal theorists like al-Ghazālī (d. 505/1111) argued that the
authenticity of this hadith was not guaranteed by consensus but rather by ‘the general rules
governing reality (al-‘āda al-jāriya).’ If Muslim scholars from Spain to Central Asia agreed
on this hadith, it was realistically impossible for it not to have a true basis in the Prophet’s
teachings.45
Creating Islamic Law outside the Quran and Sunna
In the Sunni tradition the Quran and Sunna are known as ‘the two bases (al-aslān)’ and are the
only constitutive sources of law. Consensus derives its authority from them, and legal analogy
refers new cases back to known rules from the Holy Book and the hadiths. Muslims, however,
have maintained avenues for legal reasoning outside the letter of these scriptures. Various
Sunni schools of law have reserved the right to rule on legal issues based on the best judgment
of legal scholars or in pursuit of the Muslim community’s best interest (with the general
stipulation that such rulings cannot contradict the Quran and Sunna). Both these procedures are
based on and legitimized by hadiths. Like the other hadiths in this section, however, these
reports do not measure up to the standards of Muslim hadith critics.
In fact, the famous report ‘Whatever the Muslims see as good is good according to God;
and whatever the Muslims see as reprehensible is reprehensible according to God (mā
ra’āhu al-muslimūn hasanan fa-huwa ‘ind Allāh hasan wa mā ra’āhu al-muslimūn sayyi’an
fa-huwa ‘ind Allāh sayyi’)’ is not really a Prophetic hadith at all. Hadith critics determined
that it was a statement of the Companion Ibn Mas‘ūd. Yet the early Hanafī scholar of Baghdad,
Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Shaybānī (d. 189/805), one of Abū Hanīfa’s leading disciples,
attributed it to the Prophet in his argument for Muslims instituting new practices that they felt
enhanced their religious life but did not exist during the time of the Prophet. Specifically, he
was defending ‘Umar b. al-Khattāb’s decision to organize voluntary communal nightly prayers
in the mosque during the month of Ramadan.46 This was not practiced during the Prophet’s
lifetime but was quickly embraced and became ubiquitous in the Muslim world.
An even more famous hadith is the Prophet’s saying ‘No harm and no harming (lā darar wa
lā dirār),’ which Abū Dāwūd, the author of one of the Six Books, called one of the four pillars
of legal hadiths.47 Mālik and his student al-Shāfi‘ī narrated this hadith as a mursal report, while
Ibn Mājah had it via a full isnād from the Companion ‘Ubāda b. Sāmit in his Sunan. It has
generally been considered hasan. Regardless of its authenticity in the eyes of hadith scholars,
however, this hadith became a central principle in Islamic legal thought. Muslim legal theorists
used the phrase to elaborate what they saw as one of the principal goals of Islamic law, namely
‘Promoting benefit and preventing harm.’ They have also used it to justify the widely accepted
notion of ‘public interest (maslaha mursala),’ which posited that Muslim scholars could rule
in the interest of their community as long as they did not contravene any explicit injunctions

 from the Quran or Sunna. The Hanbali scholar Najm al-Dīn al-Tūfī (d. 716/1316) used this
hadith to craft the controversial argument that if the public interest of the Muslim community
clashed with scripture, public interest should take precedence.48
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
The most interesting book to read on this topic is the recently translated Muhammad ‘Awwama,
The Influence of the Noble Hadith upon the Differences of Opinion Amongst the Jurist
Imams (London: Turath, 2014). To see how Mālik used hadiths in his Muwatta’, see Aisha
Bewley’s translation of the book, entitled Al-Muwatta of Imam Malik ibn Anas (London:
Kegan Paul Intl., 1989) and Umar F. Abd-Allah’s Malik and Medina (Brill, 2013). For the
manner in which al-Shāfi‘ī placed hadiths in his system of legal theory, see the translation of
his extremely influential Risāla entitled, The Epistle on Legal Theory, trans. Joseph Lowry
(New York: NYU Press, 2015). For more reading on the use of hadiths in early Sunni law, see
Harald Motzki, The Origins of Islamic Jurisprudence: Meccan Fiqh Before the Classical
Schools, trans. Marion Katz (Leiden: Brill, 2002); Yasin Dutton’s The Origins of Islamic Law:
The Qur’an, the Muwatta’ and Medinan ‘Amal (London: Curzon, 1999); Scott Lucas’s ‘Abu
Bakr Ibn al-Mundhir, Amputation and the Art of Ijtihād,’ International Journal of Middle
Eastern Studies 39 (2007): 351–368, and Christopher Melchert’s ‘The Traditionist-
Jurisprudents and the Framing of Islamic Law,’ Islamic Law and Society 8, no. 3 (2001): 383–
406. For a general discussion of the legal implications of hadiths in mature Sunni law, see Ibn
Rushd’s The Distinguished Jurist’s Primer, trans. Imran Ahsan Nyazee (Reading, UK: Garnet
Pub., 1994).
For in-depth discussions of mature Sunni legal theory, see Wael Hallaq’s A History of
Islamic Legal Theories (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997) and Bernard Weiss’s
The Search for God’s Law (Salt Lake City: University of Utah, 1992). For a translation of a
short book that Ibn Rajab al-Hanbalī (d. 795/1392) devoted to the ‘Scholars are the inheritors
of the prophets’ hadith, see Ibn Rajab al-Hanbalī, Heirs of the Prophets, trans. and
introduction Zaid Shakir (Chicago: Starlatch Press, 2001).
ENDNOTES
  1   ‘Inna al-Qur’ān ahkama dhālik wa al-sunna tufassiru dhālik’; Abū Sa‘d al-Sam‘ānī, Adab al-imlā’ wa al-istimlā’, p.
4.
  2   Sunan al-Dārimi: introductory chapters, bāb al-sunna qādiya ‘alā kitāb Allāh.
  3   ‘Al-Qur’ān ahwaj ilā al-sunna min al-sunna ilā al-Qur’ān’; Abū Muhammad al-Barbahārī, Sharh al-sunna, p. 71.
  4   Ibn Abī Hātim al-Rāzī, al-Jarh wa al-ta‘dīl, p. 2:20.
  5   Abū Zahra, Abū Hanīfa, p. 235; idem, Al-Shāfi‘ī, p. 166; idem, Ibn Hanbal, p. 205; idem, Mālik, p. 224.
  6   Al-Shāfi‘ī, Al-Umm, p. 7:256.
  7   Al-Shāfi‘ī, Al-Risāla, p. 177.
  8   Jāmi‘al-Tirmidhī: kitāb al-hudūd, bāb fī kam tuqta‘ al-yad; Sunan Abī Dāwūd: kitāb al-hudūd, bāb man saraqa min
hirz, bab al-qat‘ fī al-khulsa ….
  9   Abū Zahra, Abū Hanīfa, p. 266.
10   Ibn Hibbān, Sahīh Ibn Hibbān, p. 5:498.
11   Brown, The Canonization of al-Bukhārī and Muslim, p. 191.
12   ‘Abd al-Wahhāb al-Sha‘rānī, Al-Mīzān al-kubrā, p. 1:71.

 13   Jāmi‘ al-Tirmidhī: kitāb al-buyū‘, bāb mā jā’a fī al-khiyār; Anwar Shāh Kashmīrī, al-‘Arf al-shadhī (Karachi, Qadīmī
Kutubkhāne), p. 304.
14   Abū Zahra, Mālik, p. 259; al-Muwatta’: kitāb al-buyū‘, bāb bay‘ al-khiyār.
15   Abū Hilāl al-‘Askarī, Kitab al-awā’il, p. 2:119.
16   Brown, The Canonization of al-Bukhārī and Muslim, pp. 178 ff.
17   Jāmi‘ al-Tirmidhī: kitāb al-farā’id, bāb mā jā’a fī ibtāl mīrāth al-qātil.
18   Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr, al-Tamhīd, p. 24:290.
19   Al-Tahāwī, Sharh mushkil al-āthār, p. 15:39.
20   Al-‘Alā’ī, Jāmi‘ al-tahsīl fī ahkām al-marāsīl, p. 40.
21   See Muhammad ‘Awwāma, Athar al-hadīth al-sharīf fī ikhtilāf al-a’imma al-fuqahā’, pp. 30 ff.
22   Ibn Qudāma al-Maqdisī, al-Mughnī, p. 2:570; Musnad Ibn Hanbal: 4 :426.
23   Mansūr al-Buhūtī, Al-Rawd al-murbi‘, p. 108.
24   Al-Khatīb, ‘Nasīhat li-ahl al-hadīth,’ p. 124.
25   Al-Khalīlī, Al-Irshād, p. 6.
26   Ibn Taymiyya, Majmū‘at al-fatāwā, pp. 19:128 ff.
27   Jāmi‘ al-Tirmidhī: kitāb al-salāt, bāb mā jā’a fī al-ta’mīn.
28   Al-Suyūtī, Al-Azhār al-mutanāthira fī al-ahādīth al-mutawātira, p. 12.
29   Jāmi‘ al-Tirmidhī: kitāb al-tahāra, bāb mā jā’a fī al-wudū’ mimmā ghayyarat al-nār; bāb tark al-wudū‘ min al-nār.
30   Badr al-Dīn al-Zarkashī, Al-Bahr al-muhīt fī usūl al-fiqh, p. 3:268.
31   Jāmi‘ al-Tirmidhī: kitāb al-birr wa al-sila, bāb mā jā’a fī al-nafaqa ‘alā al-banāt wa al-akhawāt.
32   Muhammad al-Ghazālī, Al-Sunna al-nabawiyya bayn ahl al-fiqh wa ahl al-hadīth, pp. 56–57; Ibn Hajar, Fath al-bārī,
p. 13:70–71.
33   Ibn ‘Adī, Al-Kāmil, p. 1:125; Sunan Abī Dāwūd: kitāb al-salāt, bāb man qāla lā yaqta‘u al-salāt shay’.
34   Jāmi‘ al-Tirmidhī: kitāb al-salāt, bāb mā jā’a fī sajdatay al-sahw qabl al-taslīm.
35   Al-Munāwī, Fayd al-qadīr, vol. 8, p. 4:4101.
36   Ibn Battāl, Sharh Sahīh al-Bukhārī, vol. 1, p. 196.
37   Al-Suyūtī, Al-Jāmi‘ al-saghīr, p. 352.
38   Al-‘Ajlūnī, Kashf al-khafā’, vol. 2, p. 83.
39   Ibn Hajar, Fath al-bārī, vol. 4, p. 70.
40   Fakhr al-Islam al-Bazdawī, Usūl al-Bazdawī, vol. 1, p. 236.
41   Ibn Taymiyya, Majmū‘at al-fatāwā, vol. 19, p. 128.
42   Sunan al-Dārimī: introductory chapters, bāb al-tawarru‘ ‘an al-jawāb fīmā laysa fīhi kitāb wa lā sunna.
43   Jāmi‘ al-Tirmidhī: kitāb al-fitan, bāb mā jā’a fī luzūm al-jamā‘a.
44   Ibn Hajar, Talkhīs al-habīr, p. 3:141; al-Suyūtī, al-Jāmi‘ al-saghīr, p. 113.
45   Wael Hallaq, ‘On the Authoritativeness of Sunni Consensus,’ pp. 434 ff.
46   Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Shaybānī, Muwatta’ Mālik: bāb qiyām shahr Ramadān wa mā fīhi min al-fadl.
47   Al-Khatīb, al-Jāmi‘, vol. 2, p. 301.
48   Najm al-Dīn al-Tūfī, Risāla fī ri‘āyat al-maslaha, p. 23.

 6
THE FUNCTION OF PROPHETIC TRADITIONS IN THEOLOGY
INTRODUCTION
Throughout their history, Muslims have rarely doubted that hadiths should play some role in
understanding what actions were acceptable or unacceptable in God’s sight. Even the most
intransigent rationalists of ninth-century Baghdad accepted that hadiths could be used as a
source for law if narrated by two or four chains of transmission. Law has always been a
central part of the Islamic faith tradition, but it has not required total certainty. The different
Sunni legal schools, for example, accepted that differences of interpretation could exist
regarding the sources of the law, and the dubious authenticity of some of those sources itself
left room for further doubt.
Since the eleventh century, mainstream Sunni opinion has held that, even if considered
reliable, hadiths narrated by only a limited number of chains of transmission (termed āhād
hadiths, which are the vast preponderance of reports that make up the hadith collections) yield
only strong probability (zann rājih) and not total certainty (yaqīn) that they were truly the
commands of the Prophet. This strong probability has been deemed acceptable for deriving
Islamic law, so in practice both scholars and lay Muslims have treated sahīh hadiths as being
the authenticated words of the Prophet.
But what about theology, those tenets of what Muslims should believe about God, the
cosmos, and a person’s fate after death? Did the Quran not lambast earlier communities who
had made pronouncements about God and religion based not on revelation but merely on their
own beliefs? The Quran had proclaimed that ‘they have no knowledge of this, they do but
conjecture’ (Quran 45:24). If Muslim scholars held that the reports found in the great hadith
compilations of the ninth century only yielded ‘strong probability’ as opposed to the total
certainty yielded by the Quran, what should be the role of hadiths in theology?
THE ORIGINAL SUNNIS AND THE PRIMACY OF HADITHS IN THEOLOGY
By the twelfth century, Sunni Islam had become a very adaptive religious tradition that could
accommodate four varied schools of law, divergent schools of both literalist and speculative
theology, and numerous Sufi orders all under one ‘big-tent’ of deference to the Quran and the
Prophet’s legacy. Since that time, Sunni scholars have been able to adopt the rational methods
of Greek logicians and the thought of Gnostic Christians into the Islamic tradition, all the while
sincerely professing their loyal adherence to the Prophet’s Sunna and rejection of bid‘a, or
heretical innovation in religion.
The Sunni worldview, however, was not always so flexible. Sunni Islam began as the small
and strictly conservative ahl al-hadīth (Partisans of Hadith) sect in the eighth and ninth
centuries. For these original Sunnis ‘the isnād is part of religion,’ and they preached that if
anyone ‘impugns reports from the early community or denies anything from the hadiths of the

 Messenger of God, then doubt his Islam.’1 Even great scholars like Abū Hanīfa, who promoted
using independent legal reasoning, were heretics in the eyes of these original Sunnis.2
For these original Sunnis, in whose ranks we find early pillars of the hadith tradition like Ibn
Hanbal, al-Bukhārī, Muslim, Abū Dāwūd, and al-Tirmidhī, hadiths were not only reliable
enough to inform Muslims of proper theology – they were its primary source. As early Sunnis
proclaimed, ‘Islam is the Sunna, and the Sunna is Islam,’ and ‘the Sunna of the Messenger of
God is not known by reason, but by transmission.’3
Some of the theological beliefs that these early Sunnis upheld (and have since become part of
Sunni Islam) included:
 
A belief that God knew before creation whether a person would enter Heaven or Hell and that humans cannot comprehend
the true nature of free will and predestination.
A belief in the ‘punishment of the grave’ (‘adhāb al-qabr), or the notion that the dead are punished for their sins or
rewarded for their good deeds in the grave even before they are resurrected on the Day of Judgment. This recompense
will be determined by a test administered by two angels, Munkar and Nakīr, who will appear to a person in his grave and
ask him about God, the true religion, and the Prophet.
A belief that Jesus will return at the end of time along with another Messianic figure known as the Mahdī (The Guided
One) and that together they will vanquish the Antichrist (Dajjāl).
A belief that late at night God descends to the lowest heavens to answer the prayers for forgiveness of those Muslims
who have stayed up late in worship (see the hadith examined at the end of
Chapter 9).
A belief that on the Day of Judgment believers will be rewarded for their faith by actually seeing God.
A belief that there will be certain landmarks on the Day of Judgment. One of these is the Fount (al-Hawd), a pool where
Muhammad will meet his community. Another is the Bridge (al-Sirāt). This bridge crosses Hellfire, and, although the
believers will cross it easily, for the unbelievers it will become narrower than a hair and sharper than a sword, causing them
to fall into Hell.
 
None of these articles of faith is clearly laid out in the Quran. There are vague or ambiguous
references to some of these tenets; the holy book contains verses such as ‘On that Day [of
Judgment] their faces will be pleased, gazing at their Lord’ (Quran 75:22–23), which Sunnis
have argued establish seeing God. But the only unambiguous description for these beliefs, and
the only mention at all of others such as the Antichrist and the Mahdī, come from hadiths such
as the following:
 
The hadith from the Companions ‘Abdallāh b. Mas‘ūd, Hudhayfa b. Yamān, Jundub, and others in various permutations
that the Prophet said, ‘I will be the first of you to the Fount [on the Day of Judgment], with some from among you
raised up with me but then falling back trembling. I will say, “O my Lord, these are from my community!” but it
will be said, “You do not know what wrongs they committed after you!” ’ (From the Sahīhayn of al-Bukhārī and
Muslim)
 
The hadith of the Companion Abū Sa‘īd al-Khudrī: We were afraid that there would come after our prophet some
catastrophe, so we asked the Prophet of God and he said, ‘Indeed in my community there
will be the Messiah (mahdī), he will come and live five or seven or nine (the transmitter was not sure).’ We
asked the Prophet, ‘Five or seven or nine what?,’ and he said, ‘years.’ Then the Prophet continued, ‘And a
man will come to the Messiah and say, ‘Give me, give me,’ and he will dispense whatever he can from his own
clothing.’ (From the Sunan Ibn Mājah and the Jāmi‘ of al-Tirmidhī)4
 
The hadith of Abū ‘Ubayda b. al-Jarrāh, that ‘the Messenger of God said, “Indeed every prophet since Noah has
warned his community of the Antichrist (Dajjāl), so indeed I warn you of him.” Then he described him and said,

 “It may be that some of those who have seen me or heard my words will live to see him.” ’ (From the Jāmi‘ of
al-Tirmidhī)5
 
The hadith of the Companion Abū Hurayra, from the Prophet: ‘Indeed the dead person goes to the grave, and the
righteous man sits in his grave with no fear or terror. It is said to him, “What [religion] were you?” and he
replies, “Islam.” And it is said to him, “Who is that man?” and he replies, “Muhammad the Messenger of
God, he came to us with clear evidence from God and we believed in him.” It is said to him, “Did you see
God?” and he replies, “It is not for anyone to see God.” Then a small glimpse of Hell is given to him, and he
sees its people bound to one another, and it is said to him, “Behold what God has spared you!” Then he is
given a glimpse of Heaven and sees its splendor and all within. It is said to him, ”This is your place, you
believed in truth and died with that belief, so you will be resurrected in truth, God willing.” The iniquitous man,
however, sits in his grave terrified. It is said to him, “What [religion] were you?” and he replies, “I do not
know.” And it is said to him, “Who is that man?” and he replies, “I heard the people saying things about him
so I said them too.” Then he is shown a glimpse of Heaven and its splendor, and it is said to him, “Look at
what God has denied you.” Then he is shown a glimpse of Hell, and he sees its inhabitants bound to one
another, and it is said to him, ”This is your place, you were in doubt, in doubt you died and in doubt you will be
resurrected, God willing.” ’ (From the Sunan of Ibn Mājah)6
 
The hadith narrated by Abū Hurayra in which the Prophet says: ‘Adam and Moses argued, and Moses said, “O
Adam, you whom God created with His hands and breathed His spirit into have led the people astray and
exiled them from Paradise.” Adam replied, “And you, O Moses, whom God purified with His own speech, do
you blame me for committing an act which God had fated for me before the creation of the heavens and the
earth?” So Adam bested Moses in the argument.’ (From the Sahīh Muslim)7
The hadith narrated by Abū Hurayra that ‘The Messenger of God (s) came out to us while we were debating free
will and predestination (al-qadar) and was angered to the point that his face turned red, as if a pomegranate
had burst on his cheeks. He said, “Is this what you have been taught to do?! Is this what I was sent with!?
Indeed those who came before you perished when they began debating this matter, so I have ordered you not
to contend over it.” ’ (From the Jamī‘ of al-Tirmidhī)8
 
The elaborate epistemological (having to do with the study of knowledge and its sources)
classification of sources into those yielding probability or certainty, introduced into Sunni
Islam in the tenth century by Muslim rationalists, was totally foreign to the early Sunnis.
Hadiths that early Sunnis deemed authentic according to their system of criticism were the
words of the Prophet and compelling in every sense. As Ibn Hanbal said about the hadith in
which the Prophet foretells that Muslims will literally see God on the Day of Judgment, ‘We
believe in it and we know that it is the truth.’9 When al-Tirmidhī presents a hadith describing
how God will take people’s charitable donations ‘with His right hand,’ the author explains:
 
More than one scholar has said that this hadith and other narrations like it dealing with God’s attributes and the Lord most
high’s descending every night to the lowest heavens, that these narrations have been established [as reliable] and are to be
believed. They say that one should not fall into error concerning them and say ‘How could this be?’ It has been reported
that Mālik b. Anas, Sufyān b. ‘Uyayna, and ‘Abdallāh b. al-Mubārak all said about such hadiths, ‘Take them as is without
asking “How”.’ Such is the stance of the scholars from the People of the Sunna and the Early Community (Ahl al-Sunna
wa al-Jamā‘a).10
 
Contrast this with the stance of early Muslim rationalists like the great Mu‘tazilite author al-
Jāhiz (d. 255/869), who wrote ‘If not for reason, religions would never be upheld for God, and
we would never have been able to distinguish ourselves from the atheists, and there would be
no distinction between truth and falsehood.’11 For these rationalists, the idea that God could be

 seen or move from place to place, they felt, belittled the omnipotent and unknowable creator of
the universe. Claims that people would be punished in their graves had no basis in the Quran
and were only transmitted by glorified rumors – precisely what the Quran had warned Muslims
against.
LATER SUNNISM AND THE RECONCILIATION OF REASON AND HADITHS IN THEOLOGY
The tenth century witnessed a merging of the strict, literalist Sunni theological beliefs of Ibn
Hanbal and the rationalist Mu‘tazilites’ theories of knowledge. The individual most
responsible for this was Abū al-Hasan al-Ash‘arī (d. 324/935–6), who was born in Basra in
southern Iraq and became a prominent member of the Mu‘tazilite rationalist school there. In
300/912–13, however, he had a series of dreams in which the Prophet appeared to him and
instructed him to take care of his community, to follow the Sunna but not to abandon the ways
of rationalist theology. He understood this as meaning that he should embrace the beliefs of the
Sunnis but express and defend them with the tools of rational and speculative argument.
Al-Ash‘arī’s strategy of forcing the rationalist methods of the Mu‘tazilites into service for
Sunni beliefs became hugely influential. It allowed a merging of the Sunni and Mu‘tazilite
schools, and in the century after al-Ash‘arī’s death three Sunni scholars, Abū Ishāq al-
Isfarā’īnī (d. 418/1027), Ibn Fūrak (d. 406/1015), and Abū Bakr al-Bāqillānī (d. 403/1013),
combined hadith scholarship and the ration-alist tools of the Mu‘tazilites into what became the
dominant Ash‘arī school of theology. Because the ways in which knowledge is derived affect
law as well as theology, this school was also a way of looking at legal theory. It is often
referred to as the Ash‘arī, or ‘Majority (Jumhūr)’ school of theology and legal theory. Along
with the surviving ahl al-hadīth school of the early Sunnis (discussed below), which still
generally rejected all use of rationalist tools, the Ash‘arī/Majority school constitutes one of the
two great Sunni theological and legal-theory orthodoxies.i
Abū al-Hasan al-Ash‘arī embraced all the tenets of the early Sunni theology, such as the
punishment of the grave, seeing God on the Day of Judgment, and the denial of unrestricted free
will, proclaiming that these were the beliefs of true Sunnis.12 Merging Sunni beliefs and the
Mu‘tazilite vision of knowledge, however, presented serious challenges.
As we saw in Chapter 3, with the contributions of legal theory to hadith criticism, Mu‘tazilite
legal theory and its Ash‘arī successors divided reports transmitted from the past into two
distinct levels, each conveying its own level of certainty and suited to its appropriate tasks.
Āhād reports, or those transmitted by only a few chains of transmission, yielded probable
knowledge (zann) and were only suitable for establishing Islamic law or the details of ritual.
The second type of reports was a massively transmitted (mutawātir) one, or a report
transmitted by such a vast number of people in so many different places that it is impossible to
imagine that anyone could have made it up or conspired to forge it.
Although the hadiths establishing the beliefs mentioned above by al-Ash‘arī appear in highly
respected Sunni hadith collections such as the Sahīhayn of al-Bukhārī and Muslim, they were
only āhād hadiths. The Mu‘tazilite and Ash‘arī traditions of epistemology had made clear the
requirements that reports had to meet in order to convey absolute certainty. Legal theorists

 required that a hadith be transmitted by anywhere from five to forty transmitters at every stage
in its transmission in order to be considered mutawātir. Other influential Ash‘arīs, like al-
Juwaynī (d. 478/1085), avoided this focus on specific numbers. Instead, they argued that a
hadith was mutawātir as long as it was transmitted via circumstances that made conspiring to
forge it impossible and allowed it to convey immediate certainty to anyone who heard it. But
as we saw in Chapter 3, Sunni hadith scholars admitted that no (or at most one) hadith actually
met these requirements for being mutawātir.
How could the Sunnis who followed the new Ash‘arī tradition of theology and epistemology,
then, justify their beliefs in things like the punishment of the grave or the coming of the
Antichrist? They found two solutions: first, legal theorists like Abū Ishāq al-Isfarāyīnī and
Hanafī contemporaries like Abū Bakr al-Jassās (d. 370/981) developed a middle tier of
reports between āhād hadiths and the almost unattainable certainty of mutawātir ones. This
middle tier was called ‘well-known (mashhūr)’ or ‘widespread (mustafīd)’ and was defined
as those hadiths that might have started out with only a few chains of transmission but then
became massively transmitted as time went on. Their authority was guaranteed not by the
breadth of their transmission, but rather by the fact that the Muslim community had agreed on
their authenticity.13
Second, in the eleventh century, Ash‘arī hadith scholars and legal theorists like al-Khatīb al-
Baghdādī (d. 463/1071) and Abū Hāmid al-Ghazālī (d. 505/1111) articulated the notion of
reports that were ‘mutawātir bi’l-ma‘nā’, or ‘massively transmitted in their meaning.’ Even if
one particular hadith, they said, was not transmitted widely enough to meet the requirements
for being mutawātir, what happened if you had a number of different hadiths that all shared one
common element? Maybe no one hadith about the Messiah (Mahdī) could be considered
mutawātir, but what if we collected all the hadiths mentioning him? We find a hadith in the
books of al-Tirmidhī, Ibn Mājah, al-Bayhaqī, and al-Hākim al-Naysābūrī transmitted by
several Companions in which the Prophet says, ‘When the black banners come from eastern
Iran, go join that army, for indeed the Messiah is among them.’ We find another hadith from
two Companions in which the Prophet tells his followers that, even if only one day were
remaining before the end of the world, God would lengthen that day so that He could send a
messiah from the descendants of the Prophet with the same name as him. In another hadith
through ‘Alī, the Prophet predicts the coming of one of his descendants who will fill the earth
with justice as it has been full of injustice. Even in the comments of the Companions, we find
Ibn ‘Abbās saying that a ruler will come from the family of the Prophet, bringing justice so
absolute that under his rule flocks of sheep will be safe from predators.14
If we take all these hadiths together they all agree on one common element: there is a
Messiah who will come. According to Ash‘arī scholars, just as it is impossible to imagine that
one massively transmitted hadith could have been forged, so it is impossible to imagine that all
these separate hadiths could be forged with one common theme if that theme were not really
representative of the Prophet’s words. By creating a middle tier of non-mutawātir hadiths
whose certainty was assured by the consensus of the Muslim community or whose meanings
appeared in many different hadiths that together could be considered mutawātir, Muslims from

 the mainstream Ash‘arī school of theology could justifiably believe in articles of faith found
not in the Quran, but rather in their hadith collections.15
THE OTHER SUNNI ORTHODOXY: THE SURVIVING AHL AL-HADĪTH SCHOOL
The Ash‘arī school of theology is often called the Sunni ‘orthodoxy.’ But the original ahl al-
hadīth, early Sunni creed from which Ash‘arism evolved has continued to thrive alongside it
as a rival Sunni ‘orthodoxy’ as well. While Ash‘arīs proclaimed the theological beliefs of the
early Sunnis like Ibn Hanbal, the influence of Mu‘tazilite rationalism had led them to decline
some of the most extreme early Sunni beliefs. Certainly, Ash‘arīs affirmed that believers
would ‘see God’ on the Day of Judgment, but this could not involve actually seeing God as we
see objects in front of us today. Rather, God will create an optical image of God in their minds.
How could an omnipotent creator, wholly outside creation, be seen? The Quran says that our
vision ‘cannot grasp Him’ (Quran 6:103). Yes, authentic hadiths left no doubt that God does
indeed ‘descend to the lowest heavens’ at some point in the night, but how could an
unencompassable being engage in physical movement? Rather, it was God figuratively
‘approaching’ the believers by responding to their prayers.16
Ash‘arī theologians had accepted the Mu‘tazilite principle of content criticism. As al-
Ghazālī said, any hadith describing God in an anthropomorphic way or assigning Him some
physical location must be interpreted figuratively or rejected as false.17 In a famous hadith
known as the Hadith of the Slave Girl (hadīth al-jāriya), the Prophet tests to see if a slave girl
was Muslim by asking her if he was a prophet and asking her where God was. She replied by
saying ‘In the sky (fī al-samā’)’. The Prophet acknowledged this as a correct profession of
faith and ordered that the girl be freed.18 Ash‘arī theologians, however, said that, although it is
recognized as authentic, this hadith is only āhād and is not sufficient to establish belief.19
Extreme Ash‘arīs have gone so far as to say that anyone who assigns a direction to God or
believes that He actually moves is an unbeliever.20
In the wake of the tenth-century Ash‘arī synthesis, some Muslim theologians still maintained
the strict details of the early Sunni creed. This continuation of the original Sunni theological
school is often referred to as the Salafī school of theology (because they claim to follow the
righteous early Muslim community, or the Salaf) or as followers of ‘Traditional (Atharī)’ or
ahl al-hadīth theology. Famous adherents of this school include the Sufi ‘Abdallāh al-Ansārī
(d. 481/1089) of Herat and the Damascene scholar Ibn Taymiyya (d. 728/1328).
For this Salafī school, reason has no role in determining theological beliefs. It is ‘nothing
more than a tool for distinguishing things.’21 If the Prophet described God as descending during
the night, who are we to insist that this descent occurs in one form as opposed to another? Ibn
Taymiyya argues that the early Muslim community had no compunction about assigning a
direction to God. He asserted that the Quran, the Sunna, and the practice of the righteous early
community provided undeniable evidence that it was acceptable to point upward when
referring to God (although he maintained that this meant that God was above the heavens, not in
them).22
Adherents of the Salafī school of theology felt that the Ash‘arīs had allowed the influence of

 rationalism to lead them astray from the true beliefs of Muhammad. How could they claim that
a sahīh hadith cannot provide a reliable basis for belief, demanded the Salafī scholar Abū
Nasr al-Wā’ilī of Mecca (d. 444/1052), but that frail human reason can?23 Hadiths like the
Hadith of the Slave Girl that address theological tenets, al-Wā’ilī continues, have been
transmitted by numerous chains of transmission that are more than enough to make one’s heart
feel at ease with believing in them.24 Unlike the wayward Ash‘arīs, al-Wā’ilī boasts, his
school of theology is that of the true ‘People of the Sunna (ahl al-sunna), who stand fast on
what the early generations (salaf) had transmitted to them from the Messenger of God.’25 Today
this school of ahl al-hadīth theology is espoused by the Wahhābī movement in Saudi Arabia
and the various other hadith-based Salafī movements (see Chapter 10 for more on this).
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
For an accessible discussion of the Mu‘tazilite rationalist school, including the translation of
one of their texts, see Yahyā Nātiq bi’l-Haqq, Basran Mu’tazilite Theology, ed. Wilfred
Madelung et al. (Leiden: Brill, 2011); Defenders of Reason in Islam: Mu’tazilism from
Medieval School to Modern Symbol, by Richard Martin et al. (Oxford: Oneworld, 1997). A
selection of different theological creeds, including one attributed to Ibn Hanbal, is translated in
Montgomery Watt’s Islamic Creeds (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1994). Another
excellent selection can be found in John Alden Williams, ed., The Word of Islam (Austin:
University of Texas, 1994,
Chapter 5). Two of al-Ash‘arī’s short treatises on theology have been translated in The
Theology of al-Ash‘ari, trans. Richard McCarthy (Beirut: Imprimérie Catholique, 1953). For a
discussion of apocalyptic visions in Islam, see David Cook, Studies in Muslim Apocalyptic
(Princeton: Darwin Press, 2002).
ENDNOTES
  1   Al-Barbahārī, Sharh al-sunna, p. 81.
  2   Al-Khatīb, Tārīkh Baghdād, vol. 2, p. 176.
  3   Al-Barbahārī, Sharh al-sunna, p. 59; Abū Nasr al-Wā’ilī, Risālat al-Sijzī ilā ahl Zabīd, p. 99.
  4   Jāmi‘ al-Tirmidhī: kitāb al-fitan, bāb mā jā’a fī al-mahdī.
  5   Jāmi‘ al-Tirmidhī: kitāb al-fitan, bāb mā jā’a fī al-dajjāl.
  6   Sunan Ibn Mājah: kitāb al-zuhd, bāb dhikr al-qabr wa al-bilyā.
  7   Sahīh Muslim: kitāb al-qadar, bāb hijāj Ādam wa Mūsā (s).
  8   Jāmi‘ al-Tirmidhī: kitāb al-qadar, bāb mā jā’a fī al-tashdīd fī al-khawd fī al-qadar.
  9   Ibn al-Farra, Al-‘Udda fī usūl al-fiqh, vol. 3, p. 900.
10   Jāmi‘ al-Tirmidhī: kitāb al-zakāt, bāb mā jā’a fī fadl al-sadaqa.
11   Al-Jāhiz, Rasā’il al-Jāhiz, vol. 1, p. 285.
12   Abū al-Hasan al-Ash‘arī, Maqālāt al-islāmiyyīn, vol. 1, pp. 346–348.
13   Brown, The Canonization of al-Bukhārī and Muslim, pp. 183–193.
14   See Ahmad al-Ghumārī, Ibrāz al-wahm al-maknūn min kalām Ibn Khaldūn, p. 113.
15   Al-Sarakhsī, Usūl al-Sarakhsī, vol. 1, p. 329.
16   Al-Kawtharī, Maqālat, p. 145. Al-Bayjūrī (d. 1860) held that the hadith referred to the descent of God’s angels, not God
himself; al-Bayjūrī, Sharh Jawharat al-tawhīd, p. 158.
17   Abū Hāmid al-Ghazālī, al-Mankhūl min ta‘līqāt al-usūl, p. 286.
18   Sunan Abī Dāwūd: kitāb al-ayman wa al-nudhūr, bāb al-raqaba al-mu’mina.

 19   Taqī al-Dīn al-Subkī, al-Sayf al-saqīl fī al-radd ‘alā ibn al-Zafīl, p. 94.
20   See, for example, al-Kawtharī, Maqālāt, p. 146. Ibn Hajar al-Haytamī, al-Fatāwā al-hadīthiyya, p.152.
21   Al-Wā’ilī, Risāla, p. 85.
22   Ibn Taymiyya, Majmū‘at al-fatāwā, vol. 3, p. 97; Abū Zahra, Ibn Taymiyya, p. 269.
23   Al-Wā’ilī, Risāla, p. 101.
24   Al-Wā’ilī, Risāla, pp. 187–190.
25   Al-Wā’ilī, Risāla, p. 99.
 
i There is a third Sunni school, the Māturīdī school, which closely resembles the Ash‘arī school and thus will not be discussed in
this book.

 7
THE FUNCTION OF PROPHETIC TRADITIONS IN SUFISM
INTRODUCTION
The Islamic mystical tradition, or Sufism, has historically been one of the religion’s most
important components. Sufism has played a dual role in Islamic history. It has served as the
medium through which a spiritual elect has achieved and described direct experience with
God. At the same time, through popular rituals and the veneration of saints, Sufism has allowed
those unsung masses in Islamic civilization, whether villagers in India or merchants in the
Balkans, to feel closer to God and more intimately ensconced in their faith.
As the tradition of seeking and describing direct mystical experiences with God, Sufism is
‘the art of knocking’ on the door of the Divine.1 Because for Muslims Muhammad was the
human closest to God, practitioners of Sufism also see it as the science of understanding and
applying the Prophet’s message in the fullest and most perfect way. As the process of fulfilling
the duties of the pious Muslim and gaining proximity to God, the famous Sufi Abū Bakr al-
Shiblī (d. 334/945–6) described Sufism as ‘comforting the heart with the fan of purity, clothing
the mind with the cloak of faithfulness, acquiring generosity and rejoicing in meeting God.’2 As
the perfection of character, Sufism is ‘all proper manners, for every time and every place.’3
As in other domains, in Sufism hadiths have served as a source of guidance and a medium of
connection to the Prophet. In one sense, in Sufism the isnād of the hadith is all-important, for it
establishes the transmission of the Prophet’s teaching, his excellence of character as well as
esoteric knowledge inherited from him and taught by the pious elite. In another sense, however,
isnāds and their authenticity mean nothing in Sufism – those Sufi masters for whom the door
has been opened have been able to access God’s truth directly without the medium of prophecy
or Muhammad’s teachings. For them, truths about the reality of God and man are true whether
actually said by the Prophet or phrased in his words. The tension has been a constant one in the
Sufi tradition. One early Sufi, al-Dārānī (d. 204/820) taught that, even if you are inspired to
perform some act of worship, you should not do so until you find a hadith justifying it.
Ironically, another Sufi took a similar statement from Ibn Hanbal and tacked on a forged isnād
to the Prophet.4
THE FOUNDATION OF SUFISM IN HADITH: THE HADITH OF GABRIEL
Hadiths have always played an important role in Muslim etiquette and pious ethics. The
famous hadith scholar Abū Dāwūd once wrote that a Muslim only needed to know four hadiths,
none of which involve dogmatic or legal strictures: ‘Actions are judged only by intentions,’
‘Part of a person perfecting their Islam is to leave aside matters that do not concern
them,’ ‘What is prohibited is clear, what is permissible is clear, and what is other than that
is uncertain,’ and ‘No one’s faith is complete until he wishes for his brother what he
wishes for himself.’5

 From its early coalescence in the ninth century, the Sufi tradition has employed hadiths to
instruct those seeking the Sufi path and to justify its teachings. The Forty Hadith collection
devoted to Sufism written by the famous Iranian Sufi Abū ‘Abd al-Rahmān al-Sulamī (d.
412/1021) was one of the most widely transmitted books in the centuries after its author’s
death and served as a primer for Sufism among Muslim students. It contained hadiths urging
piety, generosity, and asceticism, such as ‘Whoever wants to join me, let him suffice from
the goods of this world with only what a traveler needs. And beware of mixing with the
rich.’6
The hadith that has historically essentialized the Sufi tradition and provided its most firm
foundation in the Prophet’s teachings is the famous Hadith of the Angel Gabriel. This report is
extremely well known and met Muslim hadith critics’ highest standards of authent-icity. It
appears in the Sahīhayn of al-Bukhārī and Muslim, as well as the three Sunans of Abū Dāwūd,
al-Tirmidhī, and Ibn Mājah, narrated from the Prophet by the Companions ‘Umar b. al-Khattāb,
Talha b. ‘Ubaydallāh, Anas b. Mālik, or Abū Hurayra. The version from Abū Hurayra
appearing in al-Bukhārī’s Sahīh reads:
 
Ishāq 
Jarīr 
 Abū Hayyān 
 Abū Zur‘a 
Abū Hurayra: One day the Prophet was out before the people
when a man came walking up to him and said, ‘O Messenger of God, what is faith (īmān)?’ [The Prophet] said, ‘Faith is to
believe in God, His angels, His messengers, that you will meet Him, and to believe in the resurrection.’ [The man] said, ‘O
Messenger of God, what is Islam (submission)?’ [The Prophet] replied, ‘Islam is to worship God, not associate anything
with Him, to perform the prayer, render the poor tithe, and fast Ramadan.’ The man asked, ‘O messenger of God, what is
ihsān (perfection)?’ [The Prophet] said, ‘Ihsān is to worship God as if you could see Him, for indeed even if you cannot
see Him, He sees you.’ [The man] said, ‘O messenger of God, when is the Hour [of Judgment]?’ [The Prophet] said, ‘The
one being asked is no more knowledgeable about that than the one asking, but I will tell you about its signs: when women
give birth to their mistresses, that is one of the signs; when the naked and barefoot rule the people, that is one of the signs;
one of five things that only God knows “Indeed God knows the Hour, he sends down the rain and knows what is in the
wombs” (Quran 31:34). Then the man left, and the Prophet ordered that he be brought back to him, but no one could find
him. Then the Prophet said, ‘That was Gabriel, he came to teach the people their religion.’7
 
The Hadith of Gabriel has served as a formative expression of how Muslims broadly conceive
of their religion. The hadith structures Islam in three tiers: it consists first of select articles of
belief, followed by the outward submission to God through the performance of set rituals and
deeds. Beyond these two basic levels of religious commitment lies the level of supererogatory
piety sought by those who truly want to live in a state of constant God-consciousness: ihsān.
Sufism has defined itself as the quest for ihsān, to be continually in a state of remembering God
and acting accordingly. Sufis have therefore considered their path to be an optional one. Those
who do not choose to pursue it still remain fully Muslim in faith and practice. Sufis elect to go
beyond what is required. ‘For this elite of the elite,’ explains the great theologian and mystic
Abū Hāmid al-Ghazālī (d. 505/1111), ‘the verse “And God is better and more enduring”
(Quran 20:73) has become manifest, and they have chosen a place “in an assembly of truth in
the presence of an omnipotent Lord” (Quran 54:55).’8
THE ISSUE OF THE AUTHENTICITY OF SUFISM AND THE ISNĀD OF SUFI TEACHINGS

 From its inception, Islam has been an iconoclastic faith opposed to erecting intermediaries
between God and man, founded on the premise that only revelation can shape the contours of
faith and ritual. This extremely conservative approach to tenets of belief and ritual (as opposed
to law) explains why Muslims from China to Great Britain, Sunni and Shiite, all pray their
daily prayers in the same way, differing only in details. This conservative spirit has also meant
that, although Sufism has played an undeniably prominent role in Islam, it has also been one of
the most controversial dimensions of the faith tradition.
The central objection launched by Muslim critics of Sufism has been that it contains elements
of heretical innovation (called bid‘a) or belief not originally part of Islam. Some Muslim
scholars have found three aspects of Sufism to be problematic: 1) ritual practices and prayers
that are viewed as imported innovations not originating in the Sunna of the Prophet or his
Companions, 2) the institution of Sufi brotherhoods in the twelfth century with formalized
relationships between a spiritual guide (Arabic ‘shaykh’ or Persian/Turkish ‘pīr’) and his
disciples, and 3) a theosophical cosmology that upholds the ‘Unicity of Existence (wahdat al-
wujūd),’ or the notion that only God actually exists and that creation is a mere illusion.
The first point was unacceptable to many Muslim scholars because it seems to break with the
fundamental Islamic principle that only the Quran and Sunna can serve as the basis for ritual
and belief. As Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya (d. 750/1351), a famous critic of Sufism, explained, in
Islam ‘the presumption about claims of ritual is that they are false until some proof is provided,
whereas the presumption in contracts and personal interactions is that they are valid until
proven otherwise.’9 The second point caused concern because Sufi brotherhoods and the
veneration of shaykhs seemed to create formalized institutions and invest certain people with
authority unacknowledged in the Prophet’s message. As Ibn Taymiyya objected, ‘It is not for
anyone to belong to a shaykh by swearing to be his follower … but rather he should take as a
guide anyone who is from among the people of faith without specifying anyone with an
excessive position of spiritual authority.’10 Finally, for many, ‘the Unicity of Existence’ was a
theological perspective similar to pantheism, or the belief that the divine was present in
creation and objects of nature – a position firmly rejected in Islam.
Architects and proponents of the Sufi tradition were aware from an early stage of these
objections and sought to ground their ideas in the original revelation of the Prophet. Abū al-
Qāsim al-Junayd (d. 298/910), the epicenter of classical Sufism in Baghdad, thus declared that
‘Our science [of Sufism] is bounded by the Quran and the Sunna.’11 Sufis admitted that
practices such as ritual gatherings where the names of God are recited or specific liturgies said
after prayers were innovations. But they were like flowers that had blossomed from seeds
rooted in the Prophet’s original teachings. As the Sufi Abū al-Hasan al-Fūshanjī (d. 348/959)
said, ‘Today Sufism is a name without a reality, it was once a reality without a name.’12
Al-Fūshanjī’s quote raises another important point concerning objections to Sufism: many of
Sufism’s harshest critics, such as Ibn al-Jawzī (d. 597/1201) and Ibn Taymiyya, were
themselves Sufis who only rejected certain corrupted components of Sufism, such as extremist
beliefs or the excessive practices of some Sufis. They maintained the legitimacy of the ethical
components of Sufism, what they called ‘the science of purifying the heart.’

 As in hadiths and law, the principal anchor for the authenticity of Sufism was the isnād. The
Sufi tradition cultivated two kinds of isnāds to the Prophet. The first was known as the isnād
al-tazkiya (isnād of purification) or the isnād al-suhba (isnād of discipleship) and was a
commonsense feature of traditional Islamic piety. The second form of isnād represented a
formal or mystical chain of transmission from teacher to student back to the Prophet.
The isnād of purification/discipleship was based on a very sensible premise. If the
Companions spent many years around the Prophet, they would have learned his pious and God-
fearing ways from his example. The Successors who studied at the Companions’ hands would
have learned this from them, and so would any committed students of the Prophet’s teachings in
subsequent generations. A sincere scholar’s duty to his students did not stop at teaching them
the Quran, the Sunna, and Islamic law. He also instructed them on proper etiquette and instilled
in them a desire for ihsān. We can see an example of this with Ismā‘īl b. ‘Ulayya (d. 193/809)
of Baghdad, an early hadith scholar whose mother had brought him to a senior scholar and
said, ‘This is my son, let him be with you and take from your etiquette and character.’13 As a
youth the famous jurist and Sufi of Baghdad, Ibn al-Jawzī, would attend the hadith dictation
sessions of one teacher who would recite a hadith and then start crying out of fear of God and
love for the Prophet. Later in life Ibn al-Jawzī would write, ‘I benefited more from his crying
than his simply transmitting the hadith.’14
The earliest recorded isnāds for Sufi teachings go back through al-Junayd. One Ja‘far al-
Khuldī (d. 348 /959) said that he ‘took’ from al-Junayd, who took from al-Sarī al-Saqatī, from
Ma‘rūf al-Karkhī, from Farqad al-Sabakhī, from al-Hasan al-Basrī, from Anas b. Mālik and
the other great Companions, from the Prophet.15 The famous Sufi systematizer al-Qushayrī (d.
465/1072) traces his isnād through his teacher Abū ‘Alī al-Daqqāq, from Abū al-Qāsim al-
Nasrābādī, from al-Shiblī, from al-Junayd, from Sarī al-Saqatī, from Ma‘rūf al-Karkhī, from
Dāwūd al-Tā’ī, from the Successors, from the Companions, from the Prophet.16
The second type of isnād in Sufism was understood as the transmission of esoteric
knowledge – a weighty matter indeed – or something equally intangible but less serious: the
transmission of blessings (baraka) from a saint to an aspirant. Many Muslims believed that the
Prophet had chosen certain Companions with whom to deposit secret knowledge beyond the
comprehension of normal Muslims and limited to the spiritual elite. The Companion Hudhayfa
b. Yamān was told about all the strife and challenges that would afflict the Muslims until the
Day of Judgment, and it was reported that Abū Hurayra said, ‘I memorized two vessels [of
knowledge] from the Prophet. As for the first, I made it known among the people. As for the
second, if I made it known my throat would be cut.’17
This esoteric knowledge could be transmitted from the Prophet to a Companion, and later
from saint to student, by a mere touch. As one report (admittedly very unreliable, according to
Muslim hadith critics) has it, when ‘Alī was washing the Prophet’s body for burial some water
splashed from the body into ‘Alī’s eyes, granting him in one instant ‘the knowledge of the
ancient and latter day sages.’18 Many Sufis believed that this knowledge could be transmitted
from such Companions through teacher to student. For many Sufis, however, and even for
critics of Sufism, these isnāds were not conduits for any secret mystical knowledge. They were

 merely symbols for the transmission of blessings from a revered pious figure to his students.
Only in the eleventh and twelfth centuries did the Sufi tradition elaborate the isnād as a
medium for transmitting the Prophet’s mystical knowledge or his blessings, at which point ‘Alī
b. Abī Tālib first emerged as an important component in the Sufi chain of transmission.19 ‘Alī
had always been seen as the Prophet’s spiritual heir, leading al-Junayd to say, ‘that is a person
who was granted ‘ilm ladunnī’, or the directly, divinely granted wisdom that God gives to
select people.20 Sufis quoted the Companion Ibn Mas‘ūd as saying that the Quran was revealed
with ‘an Outer and Inner meaning, and indeed ‘Alī b. Abī Tālib has with him the knowledge of
both.’21
The Sufi isnād through ‘Alī became very famous after the eleventh century because of what
was known as the ‘Investiture with the Cloak (libs al-khirqa).’ In this ritual, a Sufi master put a
khirqa (a cloak or shawl) on a student being initiated into his Sufi order. The khirqa became
the sign of ‘taking the path’ of a Sufi order and was often given to the student after he had
fulfilled certain requirements such as a year of charity or of spiritual vigilance. Along with
being told the special prayers of the order and giving his oath of allegiance to the shaykh,
being invested with the khirqa was a crucial part of joining a Sufi order. Sometimes khirqas
were colored and served as the uniform for a particular Sufi order. In addition to the khirqa of
initiation, Sufis also cultivated the tradition of the khirqat al-tabarruk, or the ‘cloak of
blessings,’ which was given as a benediction to a layman who did not intend to join the order.22
The famous Hanbalī scholar and Sufi Ibn al-Mubrad (d. 909/1502) explains that the devoted
student of knowledge should ‘be invested with a khirqa to wear, for blessing is to be hoped for
from that. And a group of the righteous early Muslims used to do this, asking the righteous to
invest them with a cloak and seeking to learn from their behavior and actions.’23
Ibn al-Mubrad provides us with one of the isnāds for his khirqa, which we immediately note
proceeds via the Family of the Prophet. He traces it back through a long chain of masters to:
 
Abū Bakr al-Shiblī, who was invested with the khirqa by the hand of Abū al-Qāsim al-Junayd, who received it from the
hand of Sarī al-Saqatī, who received it from the hand of Ma‘rūf al-Karkhī, who was the spiritual disciple of ‘Alī b. Mūsā al-
Ridā, who was the disciple of [his father Mūsā] al-Kāzim, who was the disciple of [his father] Ja‘far al-Sādiq, who was the
disciple of [his father Muhammad] al-Bāqir, who was the disciple of [his father] Zayn al-‘Ābidīn, who was the disciple of
his father al-Husayn, who was the disciple of his father ‘Alī b. Abī Tālib, who was the companion of the Prophet.24
 
The most famous isnād for the khirqa, however, was through the Successor al-Hasan al-Basrī,
from ‘Alī, from the Prophet.
Critics of Sufism pounced on the chain of transmission for the khirqa as a point of
vulnerability. Because the Sufi tradition had invested so much of its legitimacy in this isnād,
the methods of hadith criticism would become a central tool for those who wished to question
that legitimacy or to defend it. Ibn al-Jawzī of Baghdad criticized the way the Sufis of his day
wore the khirqa in order to appear pious and gain repute. In fact, he rejected the idea of having
an isnād for receiving the khirqa from one’s shaykh, calling it ‘all a lie’ that had no basis in the
Sunna.25 Ibn Taymiyya argued that, not only did the donning of a khirqa not come from the
Prophet’s practice, not even the early Sufis engaged in the practice (we can note in Ibn al-

 Mubrad’s isnād (above) that all mention of receiving the khirqa goes no further back in time
than Ma‘rūf). ‘Rather,’ he writes, ‘it resembles more a king passing on the trappings to his
successor … which is fine if done with good intentions. But as for making that a Sunna [of the
Prophet] or a path to God most high, that is not the case.’26
Many critics of Sufism attacked a more technical aspect of the khirqa isnād. Many Sufis
traced their isnāds through al-Hasan al-Basrī, from ‘Alī to Muhammad. But hadith masters who
did not support many Sufi practices, such as Ibn al-Salāh (d. 643/1245), Ibn Hajar (d.
852/1449), and al-Sakhāwī (d. 897/1402) all argued that al-Hasan al-Basrī had never met or
heard hadiths from ‘Alī.27 How could he have received the khirqa, or any knowledge at all for
that matter, from him?
Proponents of Sufism have tried to find evidence from the hadith tradition to bolster the claim
of al-Hasan receiving the khirqa from ‘Alī. Al-Suyūtī (d. 911/1505) points out that al-Hasan
al-Basrī was born in Medina and grew up in the house of one of the Prophet’s wives. He met
many of the Companions and attended congregational prayers led by the caliphs ‘Uthmān and
‘Alī. Since ‘Alī did not leave Medina until al-Hasan was fourteen years old, al-Hasan would
have had ample time to study with ‘Alī. Furthermore, al-Suyūtī finds examples of hadiths
where al-Hasan al-Basrī explicitly states that he heard the report from ‘Alī, such as the hadith
from the Musnad of Abū Ya‘lā al-Mawsilī that ‘The parable of my community is like the
rain: it is not known which is better, its beginning or its end.’28
The debate over the strength of the isnād for the khirqa and al-Hasan’s hearing hadith from
‘Alī was intense and has lasted until the present day, when the Moroccan Ahmad al-Ghumārī
wrote a book entitled ‘The Evident Proof for Sufis Being Connected to ‘Alī (al-Burhān al-jalī
fī intisāb al-sūfiyya ilā ‘Alī).’ But ultimately this one point cannot settle the argument over the
legitimacy of Sufism. As is clear from the isnāds listed above, Sufis cite many other isnāds for
their teachings that do not involve al-Hasan al-Basrī, ‘Alī, or the khirqa. More importantly,
many of the hadith scholars, such as Ibn al-Salāh, who criticized the isnāds for the khirqa
practice, themselves sought and received khirqas from Sufi masters! Regardless of the
authenticity of the practice, they did so because it had become an accepted tradition for
receiving blessings (baraka) from pious Muslim saints. No matter how poor its isnād, the
khirqa carried great weight as the sign of a relationship with a Sufi master as well as a token
of his blessings.
HADITHS IN THEOSOPHICAL SUFISM
Since the early period of Sufism, mystics have underscored the absolute contrast between the
ultimate reality of God and the transience of His creation. As the Quran states, ‘All things
perish except His face’ (Quran: 28:68). Many Sufis stressed how all of creation is nothing
more than an ephemeral reflection of God’s magnificence and held that man’s greatest
accomplishment is to penetrate the veil of this world and ‘become annihilated’ in God in this
life – as one forged hadith puts it, to ‘die before you die.’29 A truly pious and perspicacious
mystic grasps that God reveals His beauty (tajallī) in every object in this world and that the
pinnacle of human awareness is to know God more and more intimately through His signs and

 perfectly reflect His attributes. Attaining this state of being dissolved in God is what led
ecstatic Sufi mystics like Bayazid al-Bastāmī (d. 261/874) to declare ‘Glory be to Me!’ and
the famous Sufi martyr al-Hallāj (d. 309/922) to pronounce ‘I am the Ultimate Truth/God (anā
al-haqq)!,’ both phrases being otherwise reserved for God alone. To achieve this profound
understanding was to reconnect completely with the source of all existence and fulfill the
deepest yearnings of the soul. As the great Persian Sufi poet Jalāl al-Dīn Rūmī (d. 672/1273)
wrote, like the reed flute whose song laments its separation from the reed bed:
 
Every person who has long remained far from his source,
Longingly seeks the day of his reunion.
 
This mystical worldview flourished in the writings of Sufis like al-Ghazālī but was first
organized into a comprehensive cosmology, or view of the universe, by the seminal Sufi Muhyī
al-Dīn Ibn ‘Arabī (d. 638/1240), who hailed from Spain, traveled throughout the Middle East
and eventually died in Damascus.
Ibn ‘Arabī devised a conception of creation as a reflection of God’s perfect attributes. Each
of the manifold components and dimensions of the cosmos and the natural world mirrors His
endless beauty, order, and creative capacity. The pinnacle and capstone of creation is mankind,
the element that reflects God’s most essential attribute: His unity. Humans embody within their
souls and character all the multiplicity of the cosmos but are able to bring them into unified
balance and proper proportion. A person who has achieved this state of enlightened balance
not only embodies ‘the spirit of the cosmos,’ he or she also is the most perfect reflection of
God’s perfection. This is ‘the perfect human being (al-insān al-kāmil),’ who has purged him or
herself of imperfections and grown closer and closer to God’s attributes until he dissolves into
non-existence. For only God truly exists at all.30 For Ibn ‘Arabī, investiture with the khirqa
symbolizes ‘putting on’ the divine qualities.31
The function of revealed religion is similar. Each of the great prophets sent by God to their
respective communities embodied and reflected one of His attributes. Their culmination, which
Ibn ‘Arabī refers to with the Quranic phrase ‘the Seal of the Prophets’ (Quran 33:40), was
Muhammad. He was ‘the perfect human’ par excellence, the consummate reflection of God
who represented the goal that all seekers of truth sought and the station attained by saints. His
timeless reality, which Ibn ‘Arabī called ‘the Muhammadan Reality (al-haqīqa al-
muhammadiyya)’ was, in fact, the whole purpose of creation.
The theosophical Sufi tradition, brought to its height by Ibn ‘Arabī, explained the reason for
God’s creation in the ‘Hadith of the Hidden Treasure,’ which Ibn ‘Arabī cites many times in his
massive treatise al-Futuhāt al-makkiyya (The Meccan Revelations). It is a hadith qudsī, in
which the Prophet quotes God directly as saying ‘I was a hidden treasure, and I wanted to
be known. So I created the cosmos so that I might be known’ (kuntu kanza makhfīyan fa-
ahbabtu an u‘raf fa-khalaqtu al-khalq li-u‘rafa).This hadith communicated an essential point
of Ibn ‘Arabī’s cosmology: knowing God is the purpose of all creation. Humans exist because
God wanted them to know Him and strive to become His flawless reflections. Although this
sense is conveyed in Quranic verses such as the one reading ‘I have not created the jinn or

 mankind except to worship me’ (Quran 51:56, with Ibn ‘Abbās glossing ‘worship’ as ‘know’),
the Hadith of the Hidden Treasure imbued this motivation with an almost emotional longing
that conveys the themes of desire and intimate knowledge so key to the Sufi tradition.
A second hadith that served as an important piece of evidence in theosophical Sufism was
known as the Hadith of Reason (hadīth al-‘aql). It is another qudsī hadith, in which the
Prophet explains:
 
Indeed God, when he created reason, He said to it, ‘Come,’ and it came. Then He said, ‘Go back,’ and it went
back. So God said, ‘By my glory and beauty, I have not created anything nobler than you. By you I will take and
by you I will give’ (Inna Allāh lammā khalaqa al-‘aql qāla lahu: aqbil fa-aqbala, thumma qāla adbir fa’adbara,
fa-qāla ‘wa ‘izzatī wa jamālī mā khalaqtu khalqan ashraf minka, fa-bika ākhudhu wa bika u‘tī).
 
This hadith established an important tenet of Sufism and speculative theology in Islam in
general: man’s reason is ultimately subordinate to God and serves the cause of grasping His
truth. For Ibn ‘Arabī and upholders of the theosophical Sufi tradition, there were three ways
for humans to attain knowledge: prophetic revelation, inspiration from God (often called
‘dhawq,’ ‘tasting,’ or kashf, ‘unveiling’), and ra-tional investigation. Yet the mainstream Sunni
tradition, especially in its infancy during the ninth and tenth centuries, was highly suspicious of
relying on reason. They considered it a loophole for human beings to meddle in matters of
religion that God alone should define. For Sufis, the Hadith of Reason established that reason
obeyed God and prophecy.
Unfortunately, neither the Hadith of the Hidden Treasure nor the Hadith of Reason had any
basis in the actual words of the Prophet, according to Muslim scholars. Opponents of Ibn
‘Arabī’s theosophical Sufism, such as Ibn Taymiyya, said that the Hadith of the Hidden
Treasure ‘has no isnād, weak or strong, to the Prophet,’ and even moderate scholars who
supported Sufism, like Ibn Hajar and Mullā ‘Alī Qārī, acknowledged that its attribution to the
Prophet was baseless.32The Hadith of Reason actually did appear in some hadith collections,
although highly unreliable ones. Ibn Hanbal’s son ‘Abdallāh included it as a mursal hadith in
his book of zuhd, and al-Tabarānī included it in his large mu‘jam. However, every major Sunni
hadith critic, from early figures such as al-‘Uqaylī (d. 323/934) and al-Dāraqutnī to later ones
such as al-Sakhāwī and Mullā ‘Alī Qārī, agreed that the report was extremely weak or
forged.33
Ibn ‘Arabī himself was no amateur in hadiths; he had cultivated his own collection of hadiths
with full isnāds back to the Prophet. He acknowledged that these two hadiths had no basis
according to the methods of hadith critics. Rather, as he states in the case of the Hadith of the
Hidden Treasure, it was known to be ‘sound on the basis of unveiling (kashf)’ (see Chapter 3
on Criticism through Unveiling).34 What concern was it to Sufis if no reliable isnād could be
found for an important hadith? Sufi masters like Ibn ‘Arabī felt that their understanding of the
cosmos superseded the mere probabilities generated by Sunni hadith criticism and its reliance
on the isnād. As the early Sufi al-Bastāmī was quoted as saying, ‘You take your knowledge
dead from the dead, but I take my knowledge from the Living One who does not die.’35

 SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
Fortunately, a great deal has been written about Sufism in English. Helpful works include
Annemarie Schimmel’s Mystical Dimensions of Islam (Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina Press, 1975) and Sayyed Hosein Nasr’s Sufi Essays (London: G. Allen & Unwin,
1972). Michael Sells’ Early Islamic Mysticism (New York: Paulist Press, 1996) contains
many original texts in translation. For a more specific discussion about the theosophical Sufism
of Ibn ‘Arabī, see Claude Addas, The Quest for the Red Sulfur: The Life of Ibn ‘Arabī
(Cambridge: Islamic Text Society, 1993) and William Chittick’s The Sufi Path of Knowledge
(Albany: State University of New York Press, 1989). For an edited collection of essays
dealing with debates over Sufism within the Islamic tradition, see F. de Jong and Bernd
Radtke’s Islamic Mysticism Contested (Leiden: Brill, 1999). For a translation and discussion
of many of the hadiths frequently used in Sufism, see Javad Nurbakhsh, Traditions of the
Prophet (New York: Khaniqahi-Nimatullahi Publications, 1981). Ibn ‘Arabī’s Mishkāt al-
anwār is translated as Divine Sayings, trans. Stephen Hirtenstein (Oxford: Anqa Publications,
2004).
ENDNOTES
  1   Martin Lings, What is Sufism?, p. 7.
  2   Al-Khatīb, Tārīkh Baghdād, vol. 14, p. 393.
  3   This statement is from Abū Hafs al-Naysābūrī; Al-Sulamī, Tabaqāt al-sūfiyya, p. 119.
  4   Al-Makkī, Qūt al-qulūb, vol. 1, p. 167; Abū Nu‘aym al-Isbahānī, Hilyat al-awliyā’, vol. 10, p. 15.
  5   Ibn Nuqta, Kitāb al-taqyīd, p. 280.
  6   Al-Sulamī, Kitāb al-arba‘īn fī al-tasawwuf, p. 5.
  7   Sahīh al-Bukhārī: kitāb al-īmān, bāb 38.
  8   J. Brown, ‘The Last Days of al-Ghazzālī and the Tripartite Division of the Sufi World,’ p. 93.
  9   Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya, I‘lām al-muwaqqi‘īn, vol. 1, p. 344.
10   Ibn Taymiyya, Majmū‘at al-fatāwā, vol. 11, p. 289.
11   Al-Khatīb, Tārīkh Baghdād, vol. 7, p. 251.
12   ‘Alī Hujvīrī, Kashf al-mahjūb, p. 49.
13   Al-Dhahabī, Mīzān al-i‘tidāl, vol. 1, p. 217.
14   Ibn al-Jawzī, Mashyakhat Ibn al-Jawzī, p. 86.
15   Ibn al-Nadīm, The Fihrist, p. 455.
16   ‘Abd al-Ghāfir al-Fārisī, Tārīkh Naysābūr, pp. 513–514.
17   Sahīh al-Bukhārī: kitāb al-‘ilm, bāb hifz al-‘ilm.
18   Badr al-Dīn al-Zarkashī, Al-Tadhkira fī al-ahādīth al-mushtahira, p. 93.
19   J. Spencer Trimingham, The Sufi Orders in Islam, p. 261.
20   Abū Nasr al-Sarraj, The Kitáb al-Luma‘ fi’l-Tasawwuf, p. 129.
21   Abū Nu‘aym al-Isbahānī, Hilyat al-awliyā’, vol. 1, p. 65.
22   Trimingham, The Sufi Orders in Islam; pp. 80, 183–185.
23   Ibn al-Mubrad, Tahdhīb al-nafs li’l-‘ilm bi’l-‘ilm, p. 86.
24   Ibid., p. 88.
25   Ibn al-Jawzī, Talbīs Iblīs, pp. 186, 191.
26   Ibn Taymiyya, Majmū‘at al-fatāwā, vol. 11, p. 289.
27   Shams al-Dīn al-Sakhāwī, Al-Maqasid al-hasana, p. 338.
28   Al-Suyūtī, al-Hāwī li’l-fatāwā, vol. 1, pp. 102–104.
29   Javad Nurbakhsh, Traditions of the Prophet, p. 66.
30   William Chittick, Imaginal Worlds, pp. 34–37.
31   Lings, What is Sufism?, p. 18.
32   Al-Sakhāwī, Al-Maqāsid al-hasana, p. 334; Mullā ‘Alī Qārī, Al-Asrār, pp. 269 ff.

 33   Al-Albānī, Silsilat al-ahādīth al-da‘īfa, vol. 1, p. 53.
34   Chittick, The Sufi Path of Knowledge, p. 250.
35   ‘Abd al-Wahhāb al-Sha‘rānī, Al-Tabaqāt al-kubrā, p. 11.

 8
THE FUNCTION OF PROPHETIC TRADITIONS IN POLITICS
If there is one area of the Islamic heritage familiar to the lay reader, it is that of politics. Yet
this is a subject that the Quran does not address in any elaborate manner. The themes of power,
obedience, of rise and fall that grace the pages of the holy book concern how human
communities should relate to God’s absolute dominion, not the proper modes of human
governance. The Quran instructs Muslims to ‘Obey God, and obey the Messenger and those in
authority amongst you’ (Quran 4:59), and it praises those who conduct their affairs by mutual
consultation (shūrā) (42:38). ‘Reconciliation is best,’ the Quran teaches (4:128), but
otherwise it is not a strikingly political text. The basic foundations of Muslim political life
were laid not in the Quran but through the rapid and immediate experience of the early Muslim
community: first as it consolidated power in Arabia towards the end of the Prophet’s life; and
then as it burst into the greater Middle East after his death in 632 CE.1
Many of the key, early traditions and institutions of the Muslim polity emerged from Arabian
tribal life: the role of the leader as first amongst equals, cleverly balancing competing
interests; the centrality of mutual oaths of allegiance (bay‘a) between the leader and his
subjects (see Quran 4:10); the significance of family relations and tribal politics; the
temptations of conquest and the challenge of fairly distributing its spoils; and finally the
hopeless suffering of civil war.
Both these ideals and instructions for dealing with political realities infused the hadith
corpus as it formed in the early Islamic period. But in that formative era Muslims were only a
small minority in their new empire (for example, even 230 years after the Islamic conquests,
only fifty percent of Iraq was Muslim and only forty percent of Iran).2 They ruled over a
diverse population with its own ancient political heritage. Within a century and a half of the
Prophet’s death, the massively expanded state he had founded had moved its capital from
Medina, first to Kufa, then to Damascus, and then finally to Baghdad, ‘The City of Peace’ and
‘The Navel of the World.’ Arabian political tradition gave way as Muslim rulers adopted the
Near Eastern Roman and Persian traditions of the ruler being, as one unreliable but still very
popular hadith phrased it, ‘the shadow of God on earth.’3
THE CALIPH IS FROM THE QURAYSH
In June 2014, the Islamic State of Iraq and Sham (ISIS) issued a proclamation that it had
‘established the Islamic caliphate and appointed a caliph for the state of Muslims.’ It had
chosen as the caliph a man known as Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, one of its guerilla leaders. He
was not the most expressive or powerful member of the organization, but he was a descendent
of the Prophet’s tribe of Quraysh. This bolstered his claim to Islamic leadership.4 The Prophet
had made it clear that this bloodline was a requirement for a claimant to the caliphate, as is
described in famous hadiths in Sahīh al-Bukhārī and Sahīh Muslim, such as ‘This matter will

 remain with the Quraysh as long as there are two of them,’ and other hadiths in which the
Prophet states, ‘Dominion is with the Quraysh,’ ‘The Quraysh are the authorities over the
people in good and bad until the Day of Resurrection,’ and ‘The leaders (a’imma) are
from the Quraysh.’5
Until its abolition in 1924, leadership in the Muslim community had been tied in some way or
another to the institution of the caliphate (Arabic khilāfa, with caliph, khalīfa, meaning
‘successor’ or ‘appointed representative’). Although various forms of this word are used in the
Quran, in the holy book they generally convey the notion of succession in time. In two instances
the Quran uses the term khalīfa to describe those whom God has placed on earth to exercise
authority or to whom some authority has been delegated (Quran 38:26 and 2:30). But by the
late 800s CE Muslim exegetes had elided all of these meanings and merged them with the
notion of supreme political authority in the Abode of Islam.6
Nonetheless, surviving evidence – such as coins – leaves no proof of the title ‘caliph’ being
used before the late 600s CE. At that point, well into the Umayyad dynasty, it appears
alongside the primary title that had been used by Muslim rulers since the decade after the
Prophet’s death: ‘Commander of the Faithful (amīr al-mu’minīn)’ (this title is attested in a
rock inscription dated 58/678, during the reign of the first Umayyad caliph, Mu‘āwiya).7 The
title of caliph is, however, mentioned repeatedly in the hadith corpus, which also provides
detailed guidance on the qualifications and conditions for Muslim rulers as well as the duties
of their subjects.
The title of caliph has cast a long shadow in Islamic civilization. But neither the reality of
this office nor perceptions of it have been static. Leadership of the Muslim community passed
from the Prophet’s close friend Abū Bakr, who had been selected through a contentious
negotiation within the Muslim community, through three other close lieutenants of the Prophet,
until 657 CE. At that point, the Muslim state fragmented in civil wars over who should hold the
reins of power. This strife – as well as any notion of meritocratic rule – came to an end in 692
CE, when the Umayyad clan of the Quraysh tribe solidified their dynasty in Damascus, passing
the mantle of caliph down within their family. In 750 CE, after several years of rebellion
against the crumbling Umayyad regime, descendants of the Prophet’s uncle, ‘Abbās, seized the
title and built the new caliphal capital of Baghdad. As spoils of war from raids or new
conquests dwindled, however, the Abbasid caliphs lost control of their armies and provincial
governors. By the mid 800s, the provinces of North Africa, Egypt, and what is today
northeastern Iran and Central Asia were controlled by local dynasties bound only by nominal
loyalty to the caliphs. In Baghdad itself, the Abbasid caliphs had become prisoners or pawns
in the hands of the Turkic slave bodyguards originally imported to protect them. From the late
ninth century onward, the Abbasid caliphs would enjoy the ‘protection’ of various Persian or
Turkic warlord dynasties.
The caliphate survived despite its lack of military clout because it provided the symbolic
aegis under which the Abode of Islam cohered. The various local dynasties that ruled in the
caliph’s name could only argue their legitimacy in the language of Islam. So compelling was
the office of the caliphate that parallel claimants arose: the Shiite Fatimid ruler of North Africa

 declared himself caliph in 910 CE, and soon after the surviving Umayyad province of
Andalusia declared itself a caliphate as well. In the central Islamic lands the prestige of the
Abbasid caliphate waned. In 1258 CE the pagan Mongols sacked Baghdad and executed the
Abbasid caliph and most of his family. A refugee member of the Abbasid clan fled to Cairo,
where he and his descendants continue to ‘rule,’ and, more accurately, to bestow the formal
right to rule in their name upon the Mamluk sultans of Egypt and Syria. Ironically, on the
expanding peripheries of Islamic civilization the caliphate still carried great prestige. The
warlord sultan of Delhi in the mid 1300s proudly had his appointment as the Abbasid caliph’s
legitimate deputy read aloud at Friday prayers. In 1498 CE the sultan of the Songhay Empire of
Mali, Askia Muhammad, also obtained the blessings of the Abbasid caliph in Cairo to rule.8
The belief that the caliph had to hail from the Quraysh tribe was widely held during the early
centuries of Islam. The widely respected scholar al-Nawawī (d. 676/1277) wrote that this was
the consensus of the Prophet’s Companions.9 It was so important, in fact, that when the Abbasid
caliphs fell under the actual control of the Persian Buyid state in 945 CE, and later under the
control of the Turkic Seljuq dynasty, leading Sunni scholars like al-Ghazālī preferred to
theorize a nominal Qurayshi caliph who ‘delegated’ authority to a Persian or Turkic warlord
rather than to transfer the title of caliph to that warlord himself.10 This formalistic effort to
preserve a Qurayshi caliphate, however, soon lost out to a more pragmatic approach.
Beginning with al-Ghazālī’s own mentor, the famous Shāfi‘ī jurist and theologian al-Juwaynī
(d. 478/1085), Muslim scholars began to see that the caliph and the real holder of power had
to be one and the same person, regardless of lineage.11
By the 1400s, however, the currency of political legitimacy had suffered staggering inflation.
In the wake of the Mongol conquests, it was descent from the world conqueror Genghis Khan
that granted a right to empire. Such favor of God, shown through conquest, obviated any need
for recognition from the caliph, argued a prominent Sunni theologian of the era. In fact, he
declared the Turkic warlord who ruled western Persia to be the caliph.12 In the sixteenth
century various sultans in Southeast Asia took the title of caliph and commander of the faithful
as well.13 When the Ottoman Empire conquered Egypt and Syria in 1517, the sultan received
recognition from the last Abbasid caliph for his legitimate rule. But this was less than a
formality. For the Ottoman sultans, conquest of Constantinople in 1453 bestowed upon them the
title of Caesar. Moreover, the real anchor of their legitimacy was as supposed descendants
from the great Oghuz Turkish clan that had conquered the Middle East in the eleventh century.14
As the millennium of the Islamic calendar approached (1591 CE), the rulers of powerful
Muslim states took on the title of the messianic Mahdī. Both the Ottoman Suleiman the
Magnificent (d. 1566 CE) and the Mughal sultan Akbar the Great (d. 1605 CE) thus ruled as
‘emperor of Islam, Mahdī,’ etc. Caliph was but one of the titles they both claimed.
Had it mattered more, the Ottomans certainly had the strongest claim to the universal
caliphate. The dynasty had formally received recognition from the last Abbasid caliph.
Akbar’s grandson, the Mughal emperor Shah Jahan (d. 1666 CE), praised the Ottoman sultan as
‘successor’ of the first four caliphs, known in Sunni Islam as the Rāshidūn (rightly guided)
caliphs. But this was a diplomatic nicety.15 Being the caliph in such a context granted little

 leverage. In the sixteenth century, the newly Muslim state of Aceh in Southeast Asia hailed the
Ottoman sultans as ‘God’s caliph on earth.’ But this was only because the Ottomans had sent
crucial arms and military support in the Acehnese war against the Portuguese.16
In the mid nineteenth century, however, the claim of universal caliphate took on renewed
utility for the Ottoman Empire. In the wake of conflicts in Russia and the Caucasus, the
Ottoman sultan ‘Abd al-‘Azīz (r. 1861–76) reasserted his family’s claim to the universal
caliphate to act as the protector of Muslim refugees. The last powerful Ottoman sultan, ‘Abd
al-Hamīd II (r. 1876–1909), realized that even greater potential lay in foregrounding the
Ottoman title. Encroached on from all sides by the colonial machinations of the European
Great Powers, and with his empire being chipped away by nationalist movements in the
Balkans, Sultan ‘Abd al-Hamīd realized he could leverage his title as the caliph of all the
world’s Muslims, many of whom now lived under British, French, or Dutch rule, to protect
himself from colonial pressures.17
Ironically, reviving the caliphate’s Quraysh requirement may not have been a Muslim
initiative. Eager to oppose what they considered to be the dangerous influence of Ottoman
claims to global Muslim authority, elements within the British government began agitating
against the legitimacy of the Ottoman claim to the caliphate. Beginning in 1877, numerous
British Orientalists put forth arguments that the Ottomans could not be the caliphs since they
were clearly not descended from the Quraysh. They happily pointed to the hadiths stating this
condition. British authorities hoped to move the seat of the caliphate to friendlier areas that fell
under British influence, such as Egypt or later to Mecca.18 In March 1924, the Turkish Republic
abolished the caliphate. That same month Sherif Husayn of Mecca, a proud Qurayshi
descendant of the Prophet and also a British client, proclaimed himself caliph (only a few
months later he fled Mecca into exile as Saudi armies conquered the Hejaz).19 Two years later
it was the turn of the king of Egypt, who was of Albanian-Turkish descent, to hold a caliphal
congress in hopes of receiving nomination for the office. Though the king’s hopes were
ultimately dashed, his supporters countered those who argued that the caliph had to be of
Qurayshi descent by pointing to the long precedent of non-Quraysh caliphs.20
They had a strong point. The Ottomans, Mughals, and many other claimants to the caliphate
had all ignored the Quraysh requirement. But how could they have done so when it is so
clearly stated in hadiths found in the premier Sunni hadith collections? In his argument against
the Quraysh condition, al-Juwaynī notes regarding the hadith ‘The leaders are from the
Qurasyh (al-a’imma min Quraysh)’ that ‘some leading scholars have ruled that it is widely
transmitted (mustafīd), with its attestation known with certainty (maqtū‘ bi-thubūtihi).’ Al-
Juwaynī rebuts this by drawing on the epistemological standards developed in Sunni legal
theory and theology: the hadith may be sahīh, but its narrations fall short of the number needed
for massive parallel transmission (tawātur) and thus for certainty. Therefore no certainty
(‘ilm) exists as to the genealogical requirement. In fact, al-Juwaynī adds, God can, and has,
granted temporal power to whomever He chooses.21 Addressing the Ottoman lack of proper
genealogy after that dynasty’s claim to the caliphate in the early sixteenth century, the Ottoman
grand vizier Lutfī Pasha wrote a treatise in 1544 CE in which he argued that the hadiths on the

 Quraysh requirement were only applicable to the first few decades of Islamic rule, namely the
era of the four Rāshidūn caliphs.22
In fact, Lutfī Pasha had a strong argument. Terse hadiths like ‘The leaders are from the
Quraysh’ were among the least reliable reports on this subject in the eyes of Sunni hadith
critics. The most reliable narrations specify conditions for the Quraysh claim to the caliphate.
A hadith in Sahīh Bukhārī, narrated by Mu‘āwiya, quotes the Prophet as saying, ‘Indeed this
matter lies among the Quraysh, and no one will oppose them but God will cause him to
fall upon his face as long as they uphold the faith’ (emphasis mine).23 Others, from less
reliable collections such as the Sunan of al-Bayhaqī and the Musnad of Ibn Hanbal, include the
condition ‘as long as they obey God and are righteous in His rule,’ or that the Quraysh
‘have a right upon you all as long as they do three things: as long as they are just; if
mercy is sought from them, they grant it; and as long as, if they make a covenant, they
fulfill it.’24
According to the great historian, hadith scholar, and social philosopher Ibn Khaldūn (d.
808/1406), the conditional nature of the requirement for Qurayshi descent was clear from the
reasoning behind the hadiths. The only reason God had placed leadership of the Muslim
community in the hands of the Quraysh, Ibn Khaldūn argued, was because of the tribe’s strong
group solidarity (‘asabiyya), which the philosopher considered to be the essential ingredient
for a successful state. Following the natural cycle by which such a ruling group loses its
solidarity (success breeds complacency and then weakness, observed Ibn Khaldūn), the reason
for God having favored the Quraysh would no longer apply.25
THE LEGITIMACY OF REBELLION IN SUNNI ISLAM
Anyone who doubted the relevance of hadiths in the modern world had only to follow events in
Egypt from 2011 to 2013, during the Arab Spring and its subsequent winter chill. Throughout
this tumultuous period, invocations of the Prophet’s words flew back and forth across various
media as contending parties argued for or against protest, revolution, and finally various
government responses, each invoking religious argument to prove the legitimacy of their
claims. As the protests against the regime of Hosni Mubarak forced the leader out in late
January 2011, Egyptians arguing that it was a Muslim’s duty to protest cited the hadith that
‘The best jihad is a word of truth spoken before an oppressive ruler (kalimat haqq ‘ind
sultān jā’ir).’26 Many ulama, including the then Grand Mufti of Egypt, ‘Alī Jum‘a, warned
against the protests and the chaos and bloodshed that might result, quoting a hadith that had
become well known despite being highly unreliable: ‘Civil strife sleeps, and God curses
whomever awakens it.’27 When a military coup finally toppled the president elected to
replace Mubarak and the army massacred over a thousand civilians protesting the coup, Jum‘a
also turned to hadiths to assuage any guilt on the part of the military and its supporters. He
drew on the hadith that ‘Whoever seeks to break apart this nation, when it is united, strike
him with the sword whoever he may be.’28
 
The Prophet’s career passed from oppression, through exile and struggle, and finally to

 victorious return. Once he and his followers had been expelled from their home city of Mecca,
the Quran granted the Muslims permission to fight the Quraysh lords of the city in order to
regain what they had lost. Although the holy book notes several times the severity of warfare
and killing, it stresses that the Muslims’ cause was just. God commands the Muslims to fight
those who had made war on them, who had driven them from their homes and who were trying
to extirpate their religion. War is unappealing, the Quran affirms, but ‘strife (fitna) is worse
than killing’ (Quran 2:191, 217). Fighting should be avoided, but there are causes that justify it:
self-defense, securing religious freedom, and defense against injustice.29 But what happens
when these just causes clash with the Quranic command that Muslims should ‘Obey God, and
obey the Messenger and those in authority amongst you’? It is silent on whether this means
Muslims should refrain from rebellion if threats against life, property, and justice come from
their own rulers.
The Sunni hadith corpus, however, is not silent. As it gelled in the ninth century, Sunni Islam
was dogmatically politically quietist. In this respect it stood out against the politically activist
strains of Islam that eventually coalesced into the Zaydi Shiite tradition, which produced
consistent rebellions against Umayyad and then Abbasid rule through the late 800s CE, when
Zaydis retreated to redoubts in northern Iran and soon thereafter to Yemen. Very much unlike
the Zaydi doctrine that a true imam proved himself in part by openly resisting tyranny, firm
tenets of Sunni doctrine were that Muslims should ‘pray behind every righteous and sinful
leader’ and that obedience to the ruler was an absolute requirement provided he did not
command them to disobey God.30
These positions rested not on the Quran but on the myriad hadiths found in the mainstay Sunni
hadith collections like the Sahīhayn of al-Bukhārī and Muslim. They conveyed a clear political
message. Reports attributed to the Prophet include ‘Whoever obeys the ruler has obeyed me,
and whoever disobeys the ruler has disobeyed me,’ and ‘Incumbent upon you is listening
and obeying, in hardship and in ease, in what pleases and displeases, and even if your
properties are taken unfairly.’31 In one hadith, the Prophet is asked about rulers who would
deny people their rights. After hesitating to answer several times, he replies, ‘Listen and obey,
for what they have taken on is upon them, and what has been put on you is upon you.’32
Perhaps the most extreme is the hadith, found in Sahīh Muslim, in which the Prophet tells the
Companion Hudhayfa:
 
There will be after me leaders who will not be guided by my guidance, nor will they abide by my Sunna. Men
will arise among them whose hearts are those of devils though they be in human bodies …. Listen and obey
the commander, even if your back is beaten and your wealth taken. Listen and obey.33
 
Yet there were limits. The hadiths commanding obedience even to unjust rulers draw a line at
the ruler demonstrating ‘egregious disbelief (kufran bawāha),’ and the Prophet’s order to
listen to and obey rulers has the condition ‘as long as they pray.’34 In addition, Muslims should
not obey commands that entail clearly disobeying God’s law. When the commander of one
raiding party sent out by the Prophet ordered his soldiers to jump into a fire to show their
respect for his assigned command, they refused. They told the Prophet, who applauded them

 for their disobedience. ‘Obedience is only in what is right,’ he explained, which Sunni
scholars soon formulated into a maxim: ‘There is no obedience to a creature if it means
disobeying the Creator.’35
The Sunni tenet is clear: Muslims must not rebel against a ruler no matter how unjust or
impious he is provided he is nominally Muslim. The reasoning behind the Sunni position, and
presumably behind the sayings attributed to the Prophet, was simple. Injustice and oppression
were evils, but they were markedly better than civil war and anarchy. A brutal and uncaring
ruler was awful. But, in theory at least, Muslims who steered clear of posing any challenge to
him could lead their lives in relative safety and security. It was fitna (civil, political, and
misguided religious strife) that was the ultimate worldly evil, since it undermined all other
areas of life, ‘trading security for fear, spilling blood, freeing the hands of the foolish,
launching attacks upon the Muslims and spreading corruption in the land,’ as the famous
scholar al-Qurtubī (d. 671/1273) wrote. A saying commonly repeated in Sunni works of
political theory was ‘An oppressive leader is better than unending strife (imām ghashūm
khayr min fitna tadūm).’36
In hadiths, the strife (fitna) that the Prophet spoke of was understood to be the civil wars that
ravaged the nascent Muslim polity in the decades after his death, the general decay of the
Muslim polity over time, as well as the tribulations and temptations prophesied to afflict the
world as the end of days approached. ‘There will be fitnas,’ one famous hadith states, ‘in
which the one who stays seated is better than the one who stands, and the one who stands
still is better than the one who walks ….’37 Countless hadiths of varied reliability preach the
same message: do not involve yourselves in such strife. ‘If there is fitna between the
Muslims,’ states another hadith, ‘then take up a sword of wood.’38 Al-Nawawī summarized
the Sunni position: rebellion against the ruler is prohibited by the consensus of the Muslims
even if he is sinful, due to a fear of strife (fitna) and anarchy. The only exception is if the ruler
becomes an avowed unbeliever.39 This tenet of political theory remained strong into the
modern period. The most notable hadiths on the topic were brought together by the Ottoman
judge Yūsuf al-Nabhānī (d. 1932), a passionate advocate of the last caliphs, in his Forty
Hadiths on the Obligation of Obeying the Commander of the Faithful.
Sunni quietism, however, was at odds with the Quran’s powerful imperative for ordaining
justice in the public sphere. ‘Indeed God commands justice, virtue and giving the near of kin
their due, and He forbids indecency, wrong and wickedness,’ states the Quran (16:90). It
commands those who believe to ‘be steadfast in upholding justice, witnesses to God, even
against yourselves, your parents or your kin’ (Quran 4:135). This theme of standing for justice
is also stated most explicitly in well-known hadiths from the mainstay Sunni collections. When
the Umayyad caliph Marwān tried to give the sermon on Eid before the prayer instead of after
it, a man rose and objected that the caliph was changing the Sunna. The Companion Abū Sa‘īd
al-Khudrī then rose and reminded everyone of the Prophet’s command, ‘Whoever among you
sees a wrong, let him change it with his hand. And if he is not able, then with his tongue.
And if he is not able, then with his heart, but that is the weakest of faith.’40
Outside the Sunni fold, other Muslims had long read the Quran as prohibiting the tolerance of

 unjust rulers. God tells Abraham that he is making him a ‘leader (imām)’ for all mankind but
that, among his progeny, ‘My covenant does not include the unjust (zālimīn)’ (Quran 2:124).
Some Muslims understood this as meaning that no tyrant could be a rightful ruler or authority.
Adherents to this school of thought read the quietist hadith (found in the Sahīhayn) in which the
Prophet states, ‘We do not contest the authority of those holding it (lā nunāzi‘u al-amr
ahlahu),’ not as Sunnis did, namely ‘we do not contest the authority of those in charge,’ but
rather that legitimate holders of authority must be ‘befitting it (ahluhu).’41
Even some Sunnis trod a more nuanced path between political quietism and activism. This
was particularly true amongst early figures, who predated the formation of classical Sunnism.
Abū Hanīfa, for example, supported several rebellions against the Umayyads and Abbasids.
The Hanafī scholar al-Jassās (d. 370/981) reminded his readers that Abū Hanīfa’s position
was ‘well known on fighting oppressors and unjust leaders.’ Al-Jassās shared the position of
the Mālikī scholar Ibn Khuwayz Mindād (d. 390/1000), who explained that the Quranic verse
stating that no one unjust can uphold God’s covenant meant that, indeed, no unjust person could
be the rightful caliph. But, he adds, Muslims should not rebel against such a ruler or try to
remove him until the decision-making elite (ahl al-hall wa’l-‘aqd) decided he should be
removed.42 Commenting on the above hadiths warning against involvement in fitna, the Shāfi‘ī
scholar Muhibb al-Dīn al-Tabarī (d. 694/1295) affirms that Sunnis all agreed that Muslims
should not involve themselves in conflicts between parties driven by desire for power or
worldly goods. But this does not entail remaining silent in any disagreement:
 
… since, if it were required to stay out of every disagreement between two parties among the Muslims, and to break the
sword, then none of God’s limits would be upheld. Falsehood would never be defeated, and the people of oppression and
hypocrisy would find an easy path to declare licit people’s inviolable property and to spill their blood ….43
 
Nor should we understand that Sunni Islam approved of unjust or despotic rulers. Hadiths
clearly condemned unjust conduct on the part of the ruler, even if they urged Muslims to obey
the ruler nonetheless. The Sahīhayn feature the hadith promising that God will deny Heaven to
rulers who cheat their subjects of their rights.44 Another hadith quotes the Prophet as saying,
‘Indeed there will be rulers over you all, but do not aid them in their injustice or believe
their lies ….’45
The dogmatic quietism of the Sunni tradition, however, was able to elide the activist message
found in some hadiths. The influential sixteenth-century Hanafī scholar Mullā ‘Alī Qārī
explained that the hadith calling on believers to right wrongs by force if needed should be
understood as follows: ‘Enjoining right with the hand is done by the state, with the tongue by
scholars, and with the heart by the masses.’ This was repeated by the Salafi scholar Muqbil bin
Hādī al-Wādi‘ī (d. 2001), who penned a whole book, intended for mass audiences, entitled A
Way out of Strife (Makhraj min al-fitna). Al-Wādi‘ī argues that not rebelling against the state
is the key to escaping chaos and violence.46
 
In light of the intense debates sparked by the Arab Spring/Winter, contention has swirled
around details of some of the hadiths advocating political quietism, in particular the

 Companion Hudhayfa’s dramatic narration that Muslims should obey the ruler even if he beats
their backs and takes their property (found in Sahīh Muslim). Interestingly, this clause of the
hadith appears in only a few of the many, varied narrations of this tradition via Hudhayfa. It is
also a rare instance of a hadith in the Sahīhayn being criticized. The tenth-century hadith
master al-Dāraqutnī had concluded that this narration of the hadith suffered from a broken
isnād, since the narrator who reported it from Hudhayfa, one Abū Salām, had never actually
met him or even anyone around him.47 Al-Nawawī argued that this flaw was compensated for
by the collective strength of the tradition. But he did not address the specific wording of ‘even
if your back is beaten or your wealth taken.’ Modern defenders of the hadith have argued that a
similar wording is found in a narration in the Sunan of Abū Dāwūd and the Musnad of Ibn
Hanbal and point to al-Albānī’s conclusion that this narration is hasan.48
Depending on their political leanings, Muslim scholars have understood the meanings of this
hadith as either supporting existing regimes or validating their opposition. The well-known
Saudi scholar ‘Abd al-‘Azīz al-Turayfī, who has shown himself to be more politically
conscious than the generally quietist clerical establishment in his country, nonetheless offers
that the details of the controversial added clause do not matter because they are merely
examples of the overall injustice (zulm) that a ruler might visit upon his subjects. The
Prophet’s ruling is the same: do not rebel as long as the ruler is nominally Muslim.49 One of the
most outspoken scholarly critics of the quietist camp in and after the Arab Spring has been the
Mauritanian hadith scholar Muhammad Hasan Didū. In a 2013 television appearance, he
argues that Hudhayfa’s tradition must be read in its entirety. Referring to the narration of it in
the Sunan of Abū Dāwūd, which defenders use to substantiate the ‘beating backs and taking
wealth’ clause, Didū notes how the Prophet precedes this remark with a condition: ‘If God has
a caliph in the world, even if he strikes your back or takes your wealth, obey him.’ The viewer
is left with the conclusion that extreme political quietism is only owed to the one, universal
caliph of the Muslims, not to petty dictators. Didū reinforces this when he states that these
dictators do not implement the Shariah and therefore do not enjoy the obedience due a true
Muslim ruler.50
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
For an overview of Islamic political thought and its relation to law, see Ovamir Anjum’s
Politics, Law, and Community in Islamic Thought (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2012), and for a comprehensive study of the caliphate and disputes around it, see Mona
Hassan, Longing for the Lost Caliphate (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2016). Yūsuf
al-Nabhānī’s forty hadith collection has been translated as Forty Hadiths on the Obligation to
Obey the Ruler, trans. S. Z. Chowdhury (CreateSpace, 2015). For an excellent study on the
heritage of political activism and quietism in Sunni Islam, see Ahmet Alibašic, ‘The Right of
Political Opposition in Islamic History and Legal Theory: An Exploration of an Ambivalent
Heritage,’ Shajarah: Journal of ISTAC 4, no. 2 (1999): pp. 231–295. For an important
analysis of Muslim scholars articulating Shariah arguments for or against rising up against
oppressive rulers in the Arab Spring, see Aria Nakissa, ‘The Fiqh of Revolution and the Arab

 Spring: Secondary Segmentation as a Trend in Islamic Legal Doctrine,’ Muslim World 105
(2015): pp. 398–421. For more on the bay‘a, see Ella Landau-Tasseron, The Religious
Foundations of Political Allegiance: A Study of Bay‘a in Pre-Modern Islam (Washington,
D.C.: 
Hudson 
Institute, 
2010), 
available 
at
https://www.hudson.org/content/researchattachments/attachment/1166/20100521_baya3may20.pdf
ENDNOTES
  1   Paul Heck, ‘Politics and the Qur’ān,’ in Encyclopaedia of the Qur’ān, ed. Jane Dammen McAuliffe (Leiden: Brill, 2001).
  2   Richard Bulliet, ‘Conversion to Islam and the Emergence of a Muslim Society in Iran,’ in Levtzion, ed., Conversion to
Islam, p. 31; idem, Conversion to Islam in the Medieval Period, p. 85.
  3   Al-Albānī, Silsilat al-ahādīth al-da‘īfa, vol. 1, pp. 687–688; vol. 2, pp. 69–70; Ahmad al-Ghumārī, al-Mudāwī, vol. 4, pp.
269–270.
  4   See ‘Dā‘ish yu‘linu qiyām khilāfa islāmiyya wa yubāyi‘u al-baghdādī,’ Al-Hayat, 29 June 2014,
http://www.alhayat.com/Articles/3292478; and Ali Hashem, ‘The Many Names of Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi,’ Al Monitor, 23
March 
2015, 
http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/en/originals/2015/03/isis-baghdadi-islamic-state-caliph-many-names-al-
qaeda.html; Cole Bunzel, ‘From Paper State to Caliphate: The Ideology of the Islamic State,’ Brookings Institute (2015), pp.
18, 23 and 26. Available at https://www.brookings.edu/research/from-paper-state-to-caliphate-the-ideology-of-the-islamic-
state/.
  5   For these hadiths, see Sahīh al-Bukhārī: kitāb al-ahkām, bāb al-umarā’ min Quraysh; Sahīh Muslim: kitāb al-imāra,
bāb al-nās taba‘ li-Quraysh; Jāmi‘ al-Tirmidhī: kitāb al-manāqib, bāb fī fadl al-yaman (the author notes that the most
reliable version is actually a Companion opinion); kitāb al-fitan, bāb mā jā’a anna al-khulafā’ min Quraysh; Musnad
Ibn Hanbal, vol. 3, p. 129.
  6   Wadad Kadi, ‘Caliph,’ in Encyclopaedia of the Qur’ān.
  7   See Ovamir Anjum, Politics, Law, and Community in Islamic Thought, p. 47; Ali Ibrahim Ghabban and Robert Hoyland,
‘The inscription of Zuhayr, the oldest Islamic inscription (24 AH⁄AD 644–645), the rise of the Arabic script and the nature
of the early Islamic state,’ Arabian Archeology and Epigraphy 19 (2008): pp. 216–218.
  8   John O. Hunwick, ‘Muhammad b. Abī Bakr,’ in Encyclopaedia of Islam, 2nd ed., P. Bearman, Th. Bianquis, C. E.
Bosworth, E. van Donzel, W. P. Heinrichs, eds. First published online: 2012.
  9   Al-Nawawī, Sharh Sahīh Muslim, vol. 12, p. 441.
10   See Abū Hāmid al-Ghazālī, al-Iqtisād fī al-i‘tiqād, p. 115.
11   Anjum, Politics, Law, and Community in Islamic Thought, pp. 111–112.
12   This theologian was the famous Jalāl al-Dīn Davānī (d. 908/1502); John Woods, The Aqquyunlu, pp. 103–105.
13   Howard M. Federspiel, Sultans, Shamans and Saints, p. 45.
14   Hakan Karateke, ‘Legitimizing the Ottoman Sultanate: a Framework for Historical Analysis,’ in Legitimizing the Order:
The Ottoman Rhetoric of State Power, pp. 26–27.
15   Aziz Ahmad, Studies in Islamic Culture in the Indian Environment, p. 38.
16   Martin Kramer, Islam Assembled: The Advent of the Muslim Congresses, p. 4.
17   M. Şükrü Hanioğlu, A Brief History of the Late Ottoman Empire, p. 130. There is evidence that a message from ‘Abd al-
Hamīd prevented major Muslim forces from joining an uprising against the USA in the Philippines; Kemal Karpat, The
Politicization of Islam, p. 235.
18   Tufan Buzpinar, ‘Opposition to the Ottoman Caliphate in the Early Years of Abdülhamid II: 1877–1882,’ pp. 59–89; Mona
Hassan, Longing for the Lost Caliphate, pp. 9, 171–182.
19   Kramer, Islam Assembled, pp. 83–85.
20   Kramer, Islam Assembled, p. 101.
21   Al-Juwaynī, Ghiyāth al-umam, pp. 62–63.
22   Karateke, ‘Legitimizing the Ottoman Sultanate,’ p. 27.
23   Sahīh al-Bukhārī: kitāb al-ahkām, bāb al-umarā’ min Quraysh.
24   Al-Bayhaqī, al-Sunan al-kubrā, vol. 8, p. 246; Musnad Ibn Hanbal, vol. 4, p. 424.
25   Ibn Khaldūn, The Muqaddimah, p. 159.
26   Sunan al-Nasā’ī: kitāb al-bay‘a, bāb fadl man takallama bi’l-haqq ‘ind imām jā’ir.
27   This hadith first appears in the thirteenth century, in al-Rāfi‘ī’s Tadwīn fī akhbār qazwīn, vol. 1, p. 291. Just a few
decades later the hadith was used by the Ayyubid sultan to warn a scholar against making trouble; al-Subkī, Tabaqāt, vol.

 8, p. 231. See also al-Suyūtī, al-Jāmi‘ al-saghīr, p. 370; al-‘Ajlūnī, Kashf al-khafā, vol. 2, p. 108; Nakissa, ‘The Fiqh of
Revolution,’ p. 412.
28   See https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=081BXWsGWhc, where Jum‘a elides several hadiths from Sahīh Muslim: kitāb
al-imāra, bāb hukm man farraqa amr al-muslimīn wa huwa mujtami‘. See also the Human Rights Watch report on the
massacres, 
available 
at 
https://www.hrw.org/report/2014/08/12/all-according-plan/raba-massacre-and-mass-killings-
protesters-egypt.
29   See Quran 2:217; 2:190–193; 22:39–40; 60:7.
30   Abū Ja‘far al-Tahāwī, The Creed of Imam al-Tahāwī, p. 68.
31   Sahīh al-Bukhārī: kitāb al-fitan, bāb qawl al-Nabī s sa-tarawn ba‘dī umūran tunkirūnahā; Sahīh Muslim: kitāb al-
imāra, bāb wujūb tā‘at al-umarā’ ….
32   Sahīh Muslim: kitāb al-imāra, bāb fī tā‘at al-umarā’ wa in mana‘ū al-huqūq.
33   Sahīh Muslim: kitāb al-imāra, bāb al-amr bi-luzūm al-jamā‘a ‘ind zuhūr al-fitan. See also Sunan of Abū Dāwūd:
kitāb al-fitan wa’l-malāhim, bāb dhikr al-fitan wa dalā’ilihā.
34   Sahīh Muslim: kitāb al-imāra, bāb wujūb al-inkār ‘alā al-umarā’ fīmā yukhālifu al-shar‘ wa tark qitālihim mā sallū
….
35   Sahīh al-Bukhārī: kitāb al-ahkām, bāb al-sam‘ wa’l-tā‘a li’l-imām mā lam takun ma‘siya; Jāmi‘ al-Tirmidhī: kitāb al-
jihād, bāb mā jā’a lā tā‘a li-makhlūq fī ma‘siyat al-khāliq.
36   This is originally attributed to the Companion ‘Amr b. al-‘Ās; Abū Hāmid al-Ghazālī, Ihyā’ ‘ulūm al-dīn, vol. 4, p. 2616.
37   Sahīh al-Bukhārī: kitāb al-fitan, bāb takūnu fitna al-qā‘id fīhā khayr min al-qā’im.
38   Sunan Ibn Mājah: kitāb al-fitan, bāb al-tathabbut fī al-fitna.
39   Al-Nawawī, Sharh Sahīh Muslim, vol. 12, pp. 466–470.
40   Sahīh Muslim: kitāb al-īmān, bāb bayān kawn al-nahy ‘an al-munkar min al-īmān ….
41   Al-Qurtubī, al-Jāmi‘ li-ahkām al-Qur’ān, vol. 1, p. 520; Sahīh al-Bukhārī: kitāb al-fitan, bāb qawl al-Nabī (s) sa-
tarawn ba‘dī umuran tunkirūnahā.
42   Al-Qurtubī, ibid; Abū Bakr al-Jassās, Ahkām al-Qur’ān, vol. 1, pp. 85–87.
43   Al-Munāwī, Fayd al-qadīr, vol. 2, p. 842.
44   Sahīh al-Bukhārī: kitāb al-ahkām, bāb man istar‘ā ra‘iyya fa-lam yansuh; Sahīh Muslim: kitāb al-īmān, bāb
istihqāq al-wālī al-ghāshsh li-ra‘iyyatihi al-nār.
45   Musnad Ibn Hanbal, vol. 3, p. 24; vol. 6, p. 395.
46   ‘Alī Qārī, Mirqāt al-mafātīh, ed. Jamāl Aytānī (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, 2001), vol. 9, p. 324; Muqbil bin Hādī al-
Wādi‘ī, al-Makhraj min al-fitna, pp. 143, 186; idem, Majmū‘ fatāwā al-Wādi‘ī, p. 74.
47   Al-Dāraqutnī, Kitāb al-Tatabbu‘, ed. Muqbil al-Wādi‘ī (Medina: al-Maktaba al-Salafiyya, 1978), pp. 181–182.
48   Sunan of Abū Dāwūd: kitāb al-fitan wa’l-malāhim, bāb dhikr al-fitan wa dalā’ilihā; Musnad Ibn Hanbal, vol. 5, p.
403. The wording in this version is ‘… and if God has a caliph on earth, and he strikes your back and takes your wealth,
obey 
him 
….’; 
al-Albānī, 
Silsilat 
al-ahādīth 
al-sahīha, 
vol. 
4, 
p. 
400 
(#1791). 
See
http://www.ahlalhdeeth.com/vb/showthread.php?t=60584; http://www.almeshkat.net/vb/showthread.php?t=99133.
49   https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=utzUaboX-NI
50   https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2ey9D2Konac; https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2Lo3LD1wmhU

 9
THE AUTHENTICITY QUESTION: WESTERN DEBATES OVER THE
HISTORICAL RELIABILITY OF PROPHETIC TRADITIONS
INTRODUCTION
Thus far we have discussed hadiths and their functions in Islamic civilization as a tradition
developed by a people who affirmed that Muhammad was a prophet, the last in a series sent to
humanity by a God who created the universe and is its sole font of truth. So far, the hadith
tradition has unfolded among Muslims. Though they might have disagreed on the proper use or
interpretation of hadiths, Muslims have controlled the boundaries of the discussion. This book,
however, does not assume that the reader believes that God influences the course of history or
that Muhammad was a prophet. Instead, you may have noticed (assuming I’ve done my job) that
this book discusses hadiths in a ‘neutral’ or ‘objective’ tone according to the methods of
modern historians of a religious tradition.
Like Muslim hadith critics, however, our methods of historical criticism in the West have
their own tradition with its own assumptions. What we must admit before any further
discussion is that, because a book does not assume that God directly intervenes in human
events, that Muhammad was a prophet, or that hadiths are in general authentic, then what it
really assumes is that God does not directly interfere in historical events, that Muhammad was
just a man, and that there are real doubts about the historical reliability of the entire hadith
corpus. Few Western readers of this book, for example, would accept the explanation that we
know the Muslim hadith tradition is an accur-ate record of Muhammad’s words because God
would never let his chosen religion go unpreserved (a standard Muslim explanation). As you
can imagine, discussion of hadiths in the West differs dramatic-ally from its indigenous Muslim
counterpart.
This chapter explores the Western academic investigation of early Islamic history and its
radical critiques of the Sunni hadith tradition. ‘The Authenticity Question,’ as we will term it,
has two implications that we must bear in mind. First, Western scholars’ critical examination
of hadiths and the methods that Muslims used to authenticate them can be seen as laudably
advancing our understanding of Islamic origins and as part of a larger human endeavor to
expand all areas of knowledge. Second, however, Western criticism of the hadith tradition can
be viewed as an act of domination in which one worldview asserts its power over another by
dictating the terms by which ‘knowledge’ and ‘truth’ are established. From this perspective,
one could ask why the ‘light’ that Western scholars shed on hadiths is necessarily more
valuable to ‘the advancement of human understanding’ than what the Muslim hadith tradition
has already offered. As the likes of Edward Said have shown, knowledge is power, and
studying an object is an act of establishing control over it. It is thus no coincidence that four of
the five main avenues through which the Western study of the Islamic world progressed grew
out of European colonial or diplomatic interests (the French study of Islamic law and culture in

 colonial North Africa, similar Dutch studies in Southeast Asia, British studies of Persianate
Islam in India, and European diplomatic interest in the Ottoman Empire). The fifth avenue,
which proved most important for our subject, was that of Semitic studies, and stemmed from
Biblical studies (as we shall discuss below).1
European diplomats in the late nineteenth century plotted how to promote a ‘progressive’
Islam among their colonial populations, much as their American successors have in the twenty-
first. Western discussions about the reliability of the hadith tradition are thus not neutral, and
their influence extends beyond the lofty halls of academia. When reports surfaced in 2008 that
the Turkish government was preparing a ‘radical revision’ of the Sunni hadith canon,
mainstream Western media applauded this move towards reformation (the rumor proved
false).2 The Authenticity Question is part of a broader debate over the power dynamic between
‘Religion’ and ‘Modernity,’ and between ‘Islam’ and ‘the West.’ Instead of approaching the
Authenticity Question from a teleological perspective, where we assume that the native
‘Muslim’ vision of the hadith tradition is wrong and that Western scholars have awakened it
from its millennial slumber and are guiding it gradually forwards, we will assume what I think
is a more accurate approach: the hadith tradition is so vast and our attempts to evaluate its
authenticity so inevitably limited to small samples, that any attitudes towards its authenticity
are necessarily based more on our critical worldview than on empirical fact. Because we
ultimately cannot know empirically whether Muhammad was a prophet or a character formed
by history, or whether or not God played any role in preserving his words for posterity, we
will not look at the Authenticity Question as one to which there is a right and wrong answer.
Instead, we will identify what the various schools of thought on this question have taken as
their basic assumptions and how they have built on them. We will examine how some schools
of thought reacted to others and how their assumptions cast doubt on those of others.
THE ORIGINS AND ASSUMPTIONS OF THE WESTERN STUDY OF HADITH VS. THE ISLAMIC TRADITION
The Muslim hadith tradition and the Western academic study of Islamic origins represent
diametrically opposed approaches to evaluating the authenticity of reports about the past. Both
are critical, in that they concern themselves with questions of the reliability of historical
sources, but they proceed from two sets of assumptions that are at loggerheads. The following
section is a digression from the subject of hadiths, but it is an essential one if we are to
understand why Western and Muslim scholars view the study of hadiths so differently.
As we have seen, the Sunni tradition of hadith criticism was founded on a commitment to
sifting reliable from unreliable hadiths based on criteria that examined both the sources of a
report and its contents. In the absence of conflicting evidence or some strong objection,
however, Muslim hadith scholars and jurists treated a report attributed to the Prophet prima
facie as something he really said. Ibn Hanbal thus famously stated that even a hadith whose
authenticity was not established was a better source for law than ruling by one’s reason alone.
A critical examination of a hadith was required only when a scholar had some compelling
reason to doubt its authenticity. Even then, the charismatic authority of the Prophet could
overwhelm any critical concerns. The famous Egyptian scholar Ibn al-Hājj (d. 737/1336)

 ignored the legal ruling of a hadith and was subsequently afflicted by leprosy. When the
Prophet appeared to him in a dream, the scholar asked him why he was being punished, since
he had analyzed the hadith and concluded that it was not reliable. The Prophet replied, ‘It
suffices you to have heard it.’ Ibn al-Hājj repented and was cured by the Prophet in his dream.3
Furthermore, Muslim belief that the Prophet had been granted knowledge of the unseen and
intended his legacy to form the basis for the civilization of Islam has meant that Muslims
venerate statements attributed to the Prophet before they doubt them. Skepticism towards
hadiths was not the default setting of Muslim hadith critics.
The approach of Western scholars has been the converse. According to the famous Lord
Acton (d. 1902), the modern historian cannot believe in the presumption of innocence. His first
reaction to any historical report must be suspicion.4 The modern Western study of history,
commonly referred to (despite its internal diversity) as the Historical Critical Method
(HCM), is an approach to the past that emerged from Renaissance humanism and the critical
approach to the sources of history and religion that subsequently developed in Germany in the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Maintaining a ‘historical critical’ perspective towards the
past means that we do not accept what historical sources tell us without question. Instead, we
interrogate them and attempt to establish their reliability according to a set of assumptions
about how human society functions. As the great German historian Leopold von Ranke (d.
1886) declared, history is about looking behind the sources to find out ‘What really
happened.’5
Numerous books have been written on the origins of the modern, historical critical
worldview. In brief, its roots lie in 1) The Renaissance rediscovery of the Classical heritage
of Greece and Rome; 2) The Age of Discovery, particularly the discovery of the New World;
and 3) The Protestant Reformation. The rediscovery of the Classical heritage gave European
scholars a sense of historical distance from the past and revealed the historical changes
undergone by long revered texts like the Bible. At the same time, it affirmed a constant,
unchanging human nature – an essential tool for how Western scholars authenticate stories from
the past. Greek and Roman historians exuded a cosmopolitan skepticism that European minds
found irresistible and introduced the model of the historian as detached analyst, as opposed to
Christian chronicler. Ironically, reengaging with Classical philosophy did not energize
rumination on metaphysics and theology as much as it led to a new focus on studying the rules
governing the material world. Meanwhile, the discovery of the Americas exploded the
established map of the world, which had been drawn from the genealogies and geographies of
the Bible. The Protestant Reformation dismantled the Church’s monopoly on interpreting
scripture, ultimately resulting in a view of the Bible as a historical product bound in its own
context rather than an inerrant and timeless spring of literal truth.
The roots of the HCM emerged from the fourteenth to the sixteenth centuries, when Italian and
French humanist scholars were reintroduced to the range of the Classical Greco-Roman
heritage through manuscripts brought from the Muslim world and Byzantium. This led Western
European scholars to a new perspective towards their cultural heritage. Western Europe had
always considered itself a continuation of the Roman tradition, looking to Roman law and

 literature as exempla. But this relationship lacked any notion of historical distance; pre-
Renaissance medieval artists painted Biblical heroes in the armor of English knights and
portrayed French kings in Roman regalia.6 History was conceived according to the scheme
articulated by St. Augustine (d. 430) and drawn from Biblical themes and markers. Since the
time of Adam, history had been punctuated by one great cosmic event, the life of Christ, and
since his crucifixion mankind had been in unrelenting decline, awaiting his second coming.
One effect of the Renaissance ‘rebirth’ of interest in Roman figures like Cicero (d. 43 BCE)
was that Italian scholars like the poet Petrarch (d. 1374) developed a sense of historical depth.
Far from Augustine’s medieval synthesis of the Classics and Christianity, what Petrarch found
as he fell in love with the prose of Cicero’s Latin letters was a pagan outlook on religion.
Cicero’s writings revealed a culture of supercilious skepticism alongside public piety. The
famous Roman Senator readily admitted how ridiculous Roman religious practices were but
still demanded they be respected in public.7
Nowhere was historical distance more obvious than in the Latin language itself. Renaissance
humanism was first and foremost a realization of how different (or, according to the humanists,
how decadent) medieval Church Latin was from the language of Cicero. This fascination with
recovering the pure Latin of the ancient Romans led the Italian scholar of language, or
philologist, Lorenzo Valla (d. 1457) to realize how many Latin words had come to mean
something other than their original meaning. Examining a document called The Donation of
Constantine, which the Roman emperor Constantine supposedly had written in the early fourth
century granting the pope control over lands in the West, Valla pointed out that the presence of
linguistic anachronisms (things that appear out of place in time – like a letter supposedly
written by Jesus but mentioning mobile phones) meant that this document must have been a
later forgery. The document mentions ‘fiefs,’ or land grants, but Valla points out that this word
did not appear until much later.8 Noticing how language changed over time had led Valla to
unmask a historical forgery that had long served as a pillar of the papacy’s claim to the right to
act as a temporal power. Identifying anachronisms would serve as a pillar of the HCM.
The Renaissance fascination with language as a tool for rediscovering origins had even more
stunning implications for the study of the Bible. One of Valla’s successors in philology, the
famous Desiderius Erasmus of Rotterdam (d. 1536) duplicated Valla’s obsession with
Classical Latin in the field of Greek. Erasmus devoted his career to producing the most
reliable and accurate versions of ancient Greek texts by comparing the oldest possible
manuscripts of the books and then purging them of mistakes made in copying and the linguistic
misunderstandings or even insertions of later scholars. When producing a new edition of the
original Greek text of the New Testament, Erasmus discovered that a verse that had long been
part of the Latin Bible and used as a definitive proof of the Trinity was a later addition totally
absent in the original Greek.9
Erasmus’ life straddled stunning discovery and religious upheaval. In the span of his adult
life, two new continents were added to the map. Not only had the great minds of the past never
guessed their existence, but their inhabitants had no place in the Biblical genealogy based on
Adam’s children. With the globe as conceived by Church fathers shattered, a path was opened

 for novel scholarship. The French Protestant Isaac de la Peyrère (d. 1676) made the
controversial argument that the Bible must have been more local than global. Adam was not the
first man but merely the patriarch of one of many tribes (since Cain was able to flee and marry
elsewhere, see Genesis 4:16). Similarly, Noah’s flood was not global, just a local punishment
for the land of Canaan.10
By Peyrère’s time, the Protestant Reformation had opened new space for theological
speculation in Protestant realms like England and the Netherlands. The revival of philosophy,
or the notion that metaphysical truth can be attained by reason alone, led to the blossoming in
seventeenth-century England of Deism, or the belief in a rational God knowable and bound by
reason. In line with contempt for the papacy and the discovery of the human hand in shaping
scripture, Deists like John Toland (d. 1722) argued that Christianity had originally been a
purely rational religion but that the early Church had corrupted it with Roman superstitions.11
The great Protestant reformers had called for Christianity to be based on scripture alone,
with the Holy Spirit, not Church tradition, guiding the believer to the proper understanding of
the Bible. In contrast to Church fathers, who had long read Biblical passages in accord with
Church doctrine or with select tenets of Aristotelian philosophy, Protestant founders like John
Calvin (d. 1564) insisted on a reading of the Bible that adhered more closely to its literal
sense.12 Ironically, this approach produced an influential Protestant outgrowth whose
perspectives on the Bible proved hugely consequential. The Quakers soon came to see the
inspiration of the Holy Spirit as a more important guide to truth than scripture, so critiques of
the Bible’s historical integrity began losing their sting.13
By the late seventeenth century, such developments had raised a key question at the fringes of
Protestant thought. If truth could be known from outside scripture, either through reason or
inspiration, and if that scripture itself seemed more and more like a historical product of a
flawed Church tradition, then was the Bible really a timeless vessel of universal truth?
Benedict Spinoza (d. 1677) of Amsterdam gave the most influential answer. In his landmark
Theological-Political Treatise, he argued that the Bible must be treated as the product of a
particular time and place, phrased in the language and idiom of its original audience. The Old
Testament’s description of God walking with man (Genesis 5:24) or the miracles of Jesus in
the New Testament were not universal theological claims or historical facts. They were
expressions of how religion was understood by the Bible’s original audiences. This did not
mean that the Bible was pointless, but it no longer held the paramount place in the hierarchy of
truth. The ‘universal foundation’ of all religion, wrote Spinoza, was to love God and love
one’s neighbor, to ‘defend justice, assist the poor, not to kill, not to covet other men’s property,
etc.’14 But the historically bound Bible only shared in this truth, it did not monopolize it.
Contrast Spinoza’s approach with the Muslim position that the Quran is, as Muslim scholars
have held, ‘the most truthful of speech, suitable for all times and all places.’15
The critical methods of Erasmus and the philosophical outlook of Spinoza and the Deists
took root and blossomed in the university cities of Germany, where the HCM emerged as a
clear scholarly methodology in the late 1700s. The philological study of ancient texts led to a
myriad of critical revelations about Greco-Roman history and the Bible. Examining the style of

 Greek in Homer’s Iliad and Odyssey, F. A. Wolf concluded in 1795 that the two works could
not have been the product of one author.16 Studies of the New Testament Gospels led German
scholars to conclude that, far from being themselves eye witnesses to the events of Jesus’ life,
the gospel writers Luke and Matthew had both constructed their versions of Christ’s life based
on material from the book of Mark. As Voltaire (d. 1778) reported, scholars now knew that the
many non-canonical gospels that had been discovered actually predated the four gospels of the
New Testament.17 One German scholar, Hermann Reimarus (d. 1768), made the controversial
but ultimately influential contention that the first generations of Christians had invented much of
the life of Jesus. Leading German scholars of theology adopted the position that the truth of
religion was knowable first and foremost by reason, with both scripture and Church teachings
constructed by human hands. The truth of biblical narrative was no longer assumed. It had to
correspond to reason and fact.
Of course, some German scholars still maintained the inerrant and literal truth of the Bible.
Others tried to rationalize its miracles (Jesus did not walk on water, for example, this was
merely what the Apostles perceived). But what emerged as the conventional approach,
exemplified by the theology professor Johann Semler (d. 1791), was that the true function of
the Bible was to convey spiritual truth, not historical or scientific fact. The Biblical canon was
a historical development, and its particular meanings were tied to the worldviews of its
original audiences. The Bible was no longer the sole storehouse of truth for mankind. Rather, it
was just a stage in man’s journey towards a greater philosophical truth working its way through
history.18 The development of the HCM among German scholars culminated in David Friedrich
Strauss’s (d. 1874) controversial 1835 book The Life of Jesus. The work called for a total
rejection of the historicity of the gospels (Jesus’ miracles were just ‘culturally conditioned
myths’) and a recognition that Christianity must be based on the Christ of faith not of history.19
By the mid nineteenth century, what had been controversial seventy years earlier had become
mainstream scholarship. The primary focus of university scholarship in Germany had shifted
from Christian theology to history (though controversy still raged in more conservative
colleges in Scotland and America). Historians no longer served the Bible and theology, now
these subjects were merely objects of historical study.20 A crucial principle of the HCM was
that the original founders of all religions were not actually responsible for the later, formalized
teachings of those religions. This idea was already present in Voltaire’s observation that the
early Church fathers relied on non-canonical gospels.21 But it was ultimately formalized by the
German sociologist Max Weber (d. 1920), who argued that a religion’s orthodoxy was
organized by later generations in order to institutionalize the founder’s charismatic religious
authority. Contrast this with the Sunni belief that hadith scholars were merely preserving their
Prophet’s original teachings by ‘fending off lies from the Sunna of God’s Messenger.’
This new German school of history assumed that the first step of studying any text was to
question its reliability and determine its authenticity. In other words, the default setting for
scholars was to doubt the reliability of material transmitted about the past. Certainly, this
principle of doubt did not mean that European historians doubted everything about the past. But
as their criticisms of the textual integrity of Homer’s epics or the historical veracity of the

 Bible illustrate, they were willing to indulge fundamental doubts about the cornerstones of
Western history and religion based upon what they considered anachronisms or stylistic
inconsistencies within a text. Contrast this with the statement of Sunni hadith critics like Mullā
‘Alī al-Qārī (d. 1014/1606), who asserted that ‘it is manifestly obvious that if something has
been established by transmission [from the Prophet], then one should not heed any
contradiction with sense perception or reason.’22
In contrast to the mission of Muslim chroniclers – to preserve God’s message and recount the
history of God’s chosen community – from the eighteenth century onward European historians
envisioned themselves as detached observers. They were inspired by the Classical historians
whose works Petrarch and others had recovered in the Renaissance. In writing his monumental
Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Edward Gibbon (d. 1794) channeled the Roman
historians Tacitus (d. circa 117 CE) (whom he called the first historian who ‘applied the
science of philosophy to the study of facts’)23 and Polybius (d. 118 BCE), who insisted it was
the historian’s duty to criticize friend and foe impartially.24 Far from defending some religious
truth, historians like Gibbon saw themselves like Cicero, standing above and outside religion’s
benighted confessional traditions while remarking on the deeper, underlying constancies of
human history.
Along with an a priori doubt about textual reliability and the human construction of religious
orthodoxy, the HCM rested on other revolutionary methodological foundations. The
Renaissance had reacquainted European scholars with the Classical skepticism of Sextus
Empiricus (d. circa 210 CE), who dismissed inherent truth and universal morality as
unknowable and who urged people to focus on their immediate moral and physical
surroundings. In the sixteenth century, the Italian city of Padua emerged as a center for ‘natural
philosophy’ (i.e., science) where Aristotle’s empirical observations, not his metaphysics, were
front and center. Based on this Classical foundation, scholars in Padua developed the
procedure of hypothesis and demonstration that became the foundation of empirical
investigation.25
The writings of the Roman philosopher Lucretius (d. circa 55 BCE), a materialist who
believed that only the material world existed and that natural causes, not the gods, governed
our affairs, became wildly popular in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. His poetic
stanza ‘Happy is he who understands the causes of things’ became a mantra often quoted by
Enlightenment scholars. It embraced a materialist understanding of the world in which events
proceeded according to natural laws and not according to divine intervention. The most
influential scientists of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, such as Blaise Pascal (d.
1662), were still committed Christians. But for them, in order to protect Christian belief from
critics, faith had to be placed beyond the realm of reason and scientific study. The physical
world, on the other hand, was created by God according to fixed laws that could be measured
and relied on. In the late 1700s, a certain crass materialism emerged that did not just set the
metaphysical respectfully aside. It mocked any belief in the supernatural (reminiscent of
Lucretius himself). Particularly evident in the writings of the French encyclopedist Diderot (d.
1784), this crass materialism would become a dominant cultural theme in Europe by the late

 1800s. Contrast this with the position of Muslim scholars (and, indeed, medieval Christians)
that scripture and empirical observation had to be read in accord with one another, since both
revelation and nature were ‘signs’ of God.
The scientific revolution sealed the assumption that miracles or God’s direct involvement
could not be called on to explain history and scripture. European historians embraced the
Roman poet Horace’s command ‘Let no god intervene (nec deus intersit)’; it was the
immutable laws of nature and human society that shaped human history. They followed their
Greco-Roman exemplars, who adhered to the ancient position that human nature was an
unchanging constant.26 Herodotus (d. circa 420 BCE), the ‘Father of History,’ concluded that
Helen could not actually have been at Troy because people would never choose fighting a ten-
year war over surrendering a woman they had wrongly abducted in the first place.27 Just as
Newton discovered the laws of motion, Voltaire described human society as governed by its
own, constant laws.28
One of the central principles of the HCM was thus the Principle of Analogy (sometimes
called, clumsily, uniformitarianism), which dictates that, although cultures can differ
dramatically from place to place and era to era, human societies always function in essentially
the same way. As a result, we can reconstruct how and why events transpired in Greece
thousands of years ago based on our understanding of how individuals and groups function in
our own societies today. If people generally tend to pursue their own interests and advance
their own agendas today, then they did so in Greek times or at the time of Christ, and no one
can be realistically exempted from such motivations.29 Contrast this with the Sunni Muslim
view of history in which, as the Prophet supposedly said, ‘The best generation is the one in
which I was sent, then the next, then the next’ (or, indeed, contrast it with the pre-
Renaissance Christian view of history). For Sunni hadith critics, the Prophet’s time was ‘free
of evil.’30 His Companions were incapable of lying about him and certainly not analogous to
anyone else.
Along with the Principle of Analogy and the detection of anachronisms to identify unreliable
reports, the HCM has also relied on a tool often referred to as the Principle of Dissimilarity.
Articulated by the Dutch classicist Jakob Perizonius (d. 1715), this states that a report that
seems to contradict or challenge orthodoxy is probably originally true, since no one trying to
construct or defend that orthodoxy would have made it up.31
In the study of the Bible, these trains of thought led to the development of what was termed
Form criticism in Germany in the first decades of the twentieth century. This method of
criticism combined the presumed doubt in the integrity of texts with the modern critic’s
confidence that the construction of these texts was affected by very profane, worldly interests.
Form critics identified smaller sections within Biblical books from which their larger
narratives were composed. Each of these smaller components, termed forms, ‘served a definite
function in a concrete situation in the life of the early church.’ ‘The main purpose for the
creation, the circulation, and the use of these forms was not to preserve the history of Jesus, but
to strengthen the life of the church.’32
From the mid nineteenth century to the early twentieth, the various strands of European

 thought on science, history, and religion came together to form a worldview immediately
familiar to us today. Often called Positivism, it held that through their newly developed
methods of science and rigorous scholarship, humans were able to cast aside ignorance and
superstition and uncover the truth about their surroundings and their past. Equally important,
only truth so discovered was worth following. Although glimpses of it had appeared in the
Renaissance and around the time of the French Revolution, one crucial pillar of Positivism
was the notion of progress – that human civilization was improving. Unlike almost everything
else mentioned so far, this belief was unprecedented. It was alien to the Greeks, the Romans,
and St. Augustine alike. Despite two world wars, Positivism remains alive today. It is
immediately exemplified by the popular character Sherlock Holmes, whose detailed scientific
method allows him to reconstruct past events and determine the exact character of any person.
As summarized neatly by Voltaire, historians applying the HCM believed reports coming
from people in the past if ‘what they say of themselves is to their disadvantage, when their
stories have some resemblance of truth, and they do not contradict the normal order of
nature.’33 The important basic assumptions and methods that together made up the Historical
Critical Method of scholars in Europe and later America are:
 
1 a presumption of doubt about the authenticity or reliability of a historical text or historical
reports;
2 a general suspiciousness towards orthodox narratives presented in such texts or reports;
3 the conviction that by analyzing historical sources using the methods noted above a scholar
can sift the reliable from unreliable by identifying which parts of the text served which
historical agendas.
 
The development of the Historical Critical Method would have immediate consequences for
the questions of authenticity in the Islamic tradition. The nineteenth century in particular saw
French and British scholars begin investigating the life of Muhammad and Islam’s origins as
part of their efforts to dominate colonized Muslim populations. For German scholars of the
ancient Near East, studying Islam was a byproduct of Biblical studies. In his efforts to better
understand the historical development of the Old Testament, the German Biblical scholar
Julius Wellhausen (d. 1918) saw studying Islam as the best way to approximate the Bible’s
Semitic context. But, in seeking to ‘uncover’ the origins of Islam and its scripture, these
German scholars were engaging in a conscious, if well-intentioned, act of domination. As it
was announced proudly in 1902 at a German Orientalist conference, ‘the darkness of antiquity
has been illuminated’ and ‘light has been carried into the dusky forests’ of India, Africa, and
the Middle East by Europeans uncovering the origins and developments of these peoples’
religions. As one scholar has put it, Theodor Nöldeke’s (d. 1930) influential 1860 book on the
origins of the Quran typified ‘Europe’s newfound confidence in its superior knowledge of
oriental texts and traditions.’34 More important for our purposes, these Orientalists were
making an imposing assumption: that what had proven true of Christianity and the Bible must
be true of all other religions and all other sacred texts as well. Soon the methods of Biblical

 scholars would be brought to bear on the Arab-Islamic tradition.
THE STAGES OF WESTERN CRITICISM OF EARLY ISLAMIC HISTORY
Unlike Muslims, who developed a distinct and independent science of hadiths, Western
scholars have studied hadiths as part of a broader investigation of early Islamic history and the
origins of the religion. We can divide these studies into three general areas, all of which touch
upon the reliability of hadith literature: early Islamic political and sectarian history, the origins
of the Quran, and the origins of Islamic law.
In the Western study of early Islam and the Authenticity Question we can discern four stages
that are either chronologically or thematically distinct:
 
1 The Orientalist Approach: the initial application of the Historical Critical Method to early
Islamic history, which challenges many features of the traditional Islamic legal and historical
narratives but accepts its general structure.
2 The Philo-Islamic Apology: the arguments of some non-Muslim and Muslim scholars trained
in the West responding to Orientalist critiques of hadiths.
3 The Revisionist Approach: beginning in the late 1970s, this approach applied the critical
assumptions of the Orientalist Approach at a more basic level and questioned the greater
narrative of early Islamic history, the origins of the Quran and of Islamic law.
4 The Western Revaluation: since the 1980s, this approach has rejected the extremes of the
Revisionist Approach while continuing criticism of the early Islamic period according to the
Historical Critical Method. Rejecting the radical skepticism of the Revisionists, however,
has led some Western scholars to recognize both that the Orientalist method involves some
questionable assumptions and also that the Muslim hadith tradition is much more
sophisticated than previously believed.
THE HISTORICAL CRITICAL METHOD AND THE MATN: GOLDZIHER’S REVOLUTIONARY CRITICISM OF
HADITHS
One of the first Western writers to question the reliability of the hadith corpus as a source for
Muhammad’s life and deeds was the Scotsman William Muir (d. 1905), who served as a
colonial administrator and educator in British India. In his Life of Mohamet (1861) he rejects
the hadith corpus as clearly biased and unreliable. Hadiths merely promoted the Muslim
‘chorus of glory to Moh.ammad’ as well as the political, sectarian, and scholarly ambitions of
the early Muslim community.35 Only the Quran was a reliable source for the Prophet’s
teachings, Muir claims. Although he feels that ‘European critics’ must reject at least half of the
material in Sahīh al-Bukhārī, Muir admits that some hadiths can be considered reliable. These
include hadiths on issues on which independent reports are in general agreement as well as
hadiths that portray the Prophet unfavorably (an example of the Principle of Dissimilarity at
work).36 He also notes that classical hadith criticism was useless because it focused only on
the isnād and not the content of the hadiths themselves.37 Although with Muir we see the
application of the Historical Critical Method to hadith literature, it was the Hungarian Ignaz

 Goldziher (d. 1921) who applied this on a larger scale and with more academic rigor.
Faithful to the German school of history, Goldziher approached the textual sources of early
Islamic history and thought with ‘skeptical caution.’ The fact that there was no historical
documentation of the Prophet’s life written in his own time, and that material about him had
been transmitted through the very flexible medium of oral traditions, meant that hadiths could
not be viewed as documentary evidence. They were eminently subject to forgery and
manipulation.
Like Valla and the German biblical scholars, the critical keys that Goldziher used to sift true
from false reports about the Prophet were anachronism and the Principle of Analogy; hadiths
that seemed to address conflicts and concerns that emerged only after the Prophet’s death must
be propaganda created by parties involved in these conflicts, not the actual words of the
Prophet. As a result, the contents of many hadiths not only prove they were forged, but they
also allow the historian to determine who forged them and when.38 For Goldziher, then, hadiths
serve not as a document of the Prophet’s actual legacy, but rather as ‘a direct reflection of the
aspirations of the Islamic community.’39
Goldziher notes that the Prophet’s authority was immediately both compelling and appealing
to Muslims. He concludes that the limited writing down of hadiths was a very early process,
but the very power of the Prophet’s precedent meant that Muslims also quickly found
manipulating hadiths for their own purposes irresistible.40 The fact that the Prophet could have
had knowledge of future events served as a license for anachronism among early hadith
forgers. Events unfolding in the nascent Muslim community could be ‘described’ or ‘judged’ by
attributing statements to the Prophet, who had been informed about them by God.41 (The hadith
on the Qadarites examined in Chapter 3 is an example of this).
Goldziher lays out four main stages and motivations for the forgery of hadiths by Muslims
during the first three hundred years of Islam: political agendas, legal agendas, sectarian
agendas, and communal/historical agendas. For Goldziher, the original and most potent
motivation for the forgery of hadiths was politics. Specifically, he argues that many hadiths and
the nature of the early hadith tradition as a whole leave no doubt that the Umayyad dynasty
pursued a program of political propaganda in which hadith forgery played an important part.
Unlike the Muslim community during the Prophet’s lifetime and the pious inhabitants of
Medina after his death, in Goldziher’s opinion Umayyad rule from Syria was entirely secular
with no inherent Islamic legitimacy.42 The Umayyads thus arranged for hadiths to be forged
which legitimized their rule and political practices. Goldziher argues, for example, that during
the Second Civil War (680–92), when the Umayyads’ enemy ‘Abdallāh b. al-Zubayr (d.
73/692) was in control of Mecca and the pilgrimage routes, the Umayyads circulated a hadith
that urged Muslims not ‘to remove the saddles from their mounts [in other words, to visit]
except at three mosques,’ the Haram Mosque in Mecca, the Prophet’s Mosque in Medina and
the Al-Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem. Goldziher infers that this hadith was an attempt to establish
an alternative annual pilgrimage location in Umayyad-controlled territory in Palestine.43 When
the Umayyad caliphs wanted to appear more majestic before the congregation by delivering
sermons while seated at Friday prayers, agents of the dynasty forged a hadith that the Prophet

 had given his sermons while seated.44
The Umayyads were able to forge and circulate these hadiths successfully, Goldziher argues,
because they patronized and sponsored the early collection of hadiths in general. Goldziher
points out that the early pivot of hadith collection in the Hejaz and Syria, al-Zuhrī, served as a
tutor to Umayyad princes and a judge for the state. He even wore the uniform of the Umayyad
military. Goldziher thus does not find it surprising that al-Zuhrī appears in the isnād of the
above- mentioned hadith of the three mosques suitable for visiting.45 He notes that many other
early hadith masters, such as al-Sha‘bī al-Himyarī (d. 103–10/721–8), were also associated
with the Umayyad court. To a large extent, he suggests, the study of hadiths on a large scale
occurred because of Umayyad interest in political propaganda.
Just as political concerns drove forgery of hadiths in the Umayyad period, Goldziher
continues, they continued to motivate forgery under the Abbasids. Unlike the ‘secular’
Umayyads, the Abbasid state was built on a religious message: the return of rule to the family
of the Prophet, the Quran, and the Sunna.46 He argues that under Umayyad rule, many of the
Muslims living in their newly conquered realms had very little knowledge about the ritual and
legal details of their religion.47 Under Abbasid patronage, the pious religious scholars whose
voices had been subdued during Umayyad times had to produce a comprehensive legal,
dogmatic, and communal vision for the new Islamic empire. It was under the Abbasids that the
Sunna of the Prophet became seen as the norm for all areas of life and that hadiths began to be
used in religious law.48
Since the Quran contained very little legal material, these Muslim scholars had to resort to
other means to construct Islamic law. The Partisans of Reason (ahl al-ra’y) turned to the
legacy of Roman provincial law where, for example, Goldziher claims Muslims acquired the
notion that a defendant in a case may clear himself of charges by swearing an oath. As for the
Partisans of Hadith (ahl al-hadīth), ‘the path followed by them was a less honest one.’ They
invented whole swathes of hadiths on issues of Islamic law and dogma in order to provide the
raw material for their construction of Islamic trad-ition. With the Abbasids promoting such
activities, he concludes, ‘it may be imagined how greatly the fabrication of h.adīths flourished
under these circumstances.’ In addition to forging a vast number of hadiths, Goldziher claims
that the Abbasid-era Partisans of Hadith also invented the system of hadith criticism wholesale
as a tool for rebutting any hadiths that their opponents might use against them in debates.49
Like the Umayyads, the Abbasids and their partisans also forged hadiths to legitimize their
rule. Concerning a hadith in which the Prophet gives the spoils of war to his clan, the Banū
Hāshim, from whom the Abbasids claimed descent, while giving none to the Banū ‘Abd Shams,
the clan of the Umayyads, Goldziher remarks that the ‘dynastic-legitimistic character of this
h.adīth is obvious.’50
Throughout the early Islamic period, he asserts, pious Muslims also forged hadiths that
allowed them to make sense of the turmoil and strife wracking their community. Thus we find
the hadith in which the Prophet says that his is the best of generations and that all subsequent
ones will diverge further and further from his golden age.51 These pious scholars similarly
forged hadiths urging political quietism – a cause no doubt supported by the government – with

 hadiths such as ‘Blessed is he who avoids public agitations (inna al-sa‘īd man junniba al-
fitan).’52
Forging hadiths became a way for religious scholars to narrate the course of Islam’s history,
as well as to predict its future, through the Prophet’s words. Goldziher states that the Partisans
of Hadith ‘do not restrain themselves at all when they make the Prophet speak about the general
development of the Islamic empire.’ Hence we find hadiths describing how the Prophet, while
digging the defensive ditch around Medina, saw visions of the faraway castles of Syria and
Persia that the Muslims would conquer.53
Of course, Goldziher noted how more strictly sectarian conflicts also led to the forgery of
large numbers of hadiths.54 Shiites eager to prove ‘Alī’s claim to leadership forged the hadith
of Ghadīr Khumm, in which the Prophet is made to announce to his Companions that
‘Whoever’s master I am, ‘Alī is his master.’ Sunnis countered by forging exact counterparts
to such hadiths featuring Abū Bakr or ‘Umar instead of ‘Alī, or circulating reports emphasizing
that the Prophet had in fact made no will at all assigning a successor.55 He also identified some
less idealistic motivations for forging hadiths. Individual cities, tribes, and schools of law
would forge chauvinistic hadiths in which the Prophet would foretell or affirm their
prominence.56
Since Goldziher’s work provides the foundation for later Western criticisms of hadiths, we
must pause to examine some of his assumptions. As we saw with the German school of
historical criticism, Goldziher maintains an attitude of pronounced skepticism towards the
orthodox Muslim narrative of Islamic history. It is neither shaped by God’s will nor immune
from the profane motivations that afflict humans everywhere. The early Muslim community was
not some morally upright polity but a series of self-interested parties that exploited the
authority of the Prophet to their benefit. At the root of his reasoning lies the critical assumption
that, if a hadith serves the purposes of a group, it was forged by that group. This is especially
clear if the hadith contains some anachronism.
His willingness to indulge in skepticism is crucial for his conclusions about the hadith
tradition. Describing the hadith activity of the early transmitter ‘Abd al-Rahmān b. Khālid,
Goldziher states confidently that ‘there are presumably many [of his hadiths] which were to
benefit the prevailing political tendencies, because this ‘Abd al-Rahmān was for years an
important official of Umayyad princes.’57 In other words, the simple fact that ‘Abd al-Rahmān
served as an Umayyad functionary meant that he must have forged hadiths to support Umayyad
causes. Less skeptical scholars might not feel comfortable with this reasoning, since a person
can work for a state or company without lying on its behalf. In the above-mentioned case of the
Prophet giving his clan more of the spoils of war than he gave to the Umayyad clan, why
should we assume that this is forged simply because it seems to support the anti-Umayyad
agenda of the Abbasids? It is not inconceivable that the Prophet actually did grant his clan the
lion’s share of booty, especially since the chief of the Umayyad family, Abū Sufyān, had been a
diehard opponent of Islam in Mecca.
Sometimes Goldziher’s vision of the hadith tradition as inherently manipulative and
unreliable leads him to misinterpret evidence. As proof that Abbasid-era hadith scholars

 forged reports for the benefit of the state, he discusses the case of Ghiyāth b. Ibrāhīm, who
made up a hadith in which the Prophet allowed raising pigeons for competition because
Ghiyāth knew that the Abbasid caliph al-Mahdī was fond of them. Goldziher concludes that,
although the caliph caught on to the forgery, ‘the tale nonetheless shows what a court theologian
was capable of doing in matters of the tradition.’58 This story, however, is only found in
Muslim sources as a textbook example of the sin of forging hadiths. Sunni hadith critics reviled
Ghiyāth b. Ibrāhīm as a forger and referred to the incident as an example of how one person
forged a hadith and how the network of critics immediately caught it. Goldziher, on the other
hand, uses a story designed to illustrate an exception to represent the rule.
Goldziher’s investigation of forgery in the hadith tradition nonetheless leads to some
tremendous insights as to how pious Muslims could concoct lies about their Prophet. He
describes how after the Prophet’s death even his Companions forged hadiths ‘which were
thought to be in accord with his sentiments and could therefore, in their view, legitimately be
ascribed to him.’59 Under the Umayyads and Abbasids, he suggests, hadith scholars could
justify forging hadiths because phrasing statements as the words of the Prophet was the idiom
in which authority was expressed. ‘The end sanctified the means.’ The widespread circulation
of hadiths such as one in which the Prophet instructs Muslims that, if they hear a hadith whose
meaning accords with the Quran, ‘then it is true whether I said it or not,’ demonstrate that
some Muslims found no conflict in preserving what they felt were legitimate components of the
Prophet’s teachings by attributing false hadiths to him (Note: Muslim scholars considered this
hadith to be unreliable or forged).60
Like Muir, Goldziher concluded that content criticism played no discernable role in the work
of Muslim hadith critics. Even if the text of a hadith is replete with suspicious material, he
observes, ‘Nobody is allowed to say: “because the matn contains a logical contradiction or
historical absurdity I doubt the correctness of the isnād.” ’ From this he concludes that ‘Muslim
critics have no feeling for even the crudest anachronisms provided that the isnād is correct.’61
Goldziher’s conclusion that examining the contents of reports was not a component of early
hadith criticism has been consistently echoed by Western scholars.
DATING HADITH FORGERY BYISNĀDS: THE SCHOOL OF JOSEPH SCHACHT
Goldziher had brought the European historical critical tradition to bear on hadith literature and
had concluded that a significant number of hadiths that Muslims believed were authentic were
actually forged as part of the articulation of Islamic political, legal, dogmatic, and historical
worldviews. Western criticism of hadiths was brought to a new level by a German scholar
named Joseph Schacht (d. 1969), who built on Goldziher’s skepticism towards the reliability
of hadith literature. Schacht also concludes that hadiths cannot be assumed in any way to
actually describe the Prophet’s life.62 While Goldziher focused on political propaganda and
sectarian agendas, Schacht focused specifically on the function of hadiths in Islamic law.
Whereas Goldziher had utilized the matn of hadiths to determine when and why they were
forged, Schacht examined the isnāds and the diachronic (literally, ‘across time’) tradition of
hadith collection and use.

 Legal hadiths, Schacht argues, do not represent the actual details of the Prophet’s life. Rather,
they were attributed to the Prophet by later schools of law to lend support to their doctrines.63
He presents one simple observation that underlies his entire criticism of the hadith corpus. If
we look at admittedly early Muslim scholarly writings, such as the letter that al-Hasan al-Basrī
(d. 110/728) addressed to the Umayyad caliph ‘Abd al-Malik (d. 86/705) warning him not to
adopt a predestinarian outlook, we find that al-Hasan does not mention hadiths as part of his
argument. Instead, he draws on the Quran and stories of earlier prophets.64 Since Sunni hadith
collections contain plentiful hadiths that al-Hasan al-Basrī could have used as evidence in his
treatise, Schacht concludes, the fact that he did not use them in his polemics means that these
hadiths must not have existed at the time.65 This type of argument is known as an argument e
silentio, or ‘from silence.’
Schacht argues that the original study and elaboration of Islamic law, which he calls ‘the
ancient schools of law,’ developed in cities such as Kufa and Medina around the practice of
that local community and the opinions of its senior Muslim religious figures, such as Abū
Hanīfa, Mālik b. Anas, and al-Layth b. Sa‘d. The Prophet’s Sunna was not an immediately
revered source for law. Debates among these scholars, however, caused a great deal of
contention because none of these ancient schools of law possessed arguments that their
opponents found compelling enough to follow. Schacht thus concludes that by the late eighth
and early ninth centuries, Muslim scholars of these ancient schools attempted to resolve this
interpretive chaos by investing the legal precedent of the Prophet and his Companions with
more authority. Schacht associates this transition with al-Shāfi‘ī (d. 204/820), whose famous
Risāla documents his campaign to identify the notion of authoritative precedent (sunna) solely
with Prophetic hadiths.66
 

 Figure 9.0 Schacht’s Common Link
 
According to Schacht’s thought, the movement away from the precedent of numerous
authoritative figures such as the Companions and Successors to the Prophet himself manifested
itself in the ‘backgrowth’ of isnāds. Schacht’s reasoning was simple and clear. Books
surviving from the ancient schools of law, like Mālik’s Muwatta’, include far more reports
from later figures than from the Prophet himself.67 The collections compiled after al-Shāfi‘ī,
however, such as the canonical Six Books, were undeniably focused on Prophetic reports.68
Furthermore, these collections often included reports attributed to the Prophet that the authors
of earlier hadith collections had attributed to Companions or Successors. A report in the
Muwatta’ may be attributed to a Companion, while a generation later al-Shāfi‘ī attributes the
same report to the Prophet through a defective mursal isnād (in which there exists a gap in the
isnād between the Prophet and the person quoting him). Two generations later, in the Sahīh of
al-Bukhārī, we find the same hadith with a complete isnād to the Prophet.69 Schacht contended
that the Prophetic versions of these reports had clearly been forged after the compilation of
works such as the Muwatta’, since if they had existed earlier, then scholars like Mālik no
doubt would have included them in their writings to trump their adversaries in legal debates.70
In Schacht’s view, the development of law in the first centuries of Islam was thus a slow
process of finding more and more compelling sources of authority for legal or doctrinal
maxims. Statements from Successors were the oldest and thus most historically accur-ate.71 In

 debates between early legal scholars, however, the problem of competing Successor reports
was solved by disingenuous experts attributing these statements to the next highest rung on the
ladder of authority: the Companions of the Prophet. We should thus treat these Companion
reports as historical fabrications.72 By the mid eighth century, the problem of competing reports
from the Companions resulted in such statements being pushed back to the Prophet himself. Al-
Shāfi‘ī proved the greatest champion of this total reliance on Prophetic hadiths. Since the
major Sunni hadith collections consist almost entirely of reports from the Prophet, much of
their material must have been put into circulation after al-Shāfi‘ī’s time.73 Schacht’s
conclusions yielded a simple rule: the farther back the isnād of a hadith goes, the more assured
we should be of its fabrication and the later the date that this fabrication occurred.74
But how do we know who was responsible for the backgrowth of an isnād and when they had
attributed a statement to the Prophet? For the legal hadiths that Schacht studies, he posits the
theory of the Common Link (see Figure 9.0). Schacht notices that for the hadiths he selected for
analysis, the report is transmitted by only one chain until a certain point several generations
after the Prophet. After this transmitter, whom Schacht terms the ‘Common Link,’ the hadith
spreads out to more chains of transmission. Since the eighth century witnessed a process of
isnāds growing backwards, then it seems reasonable to assume that this Common Link is
responsible for fabricating his isnād back to the Prophet. Everything before the Common Link
is thus made up, which explains why the hadith only spreads out widely after him.75
Schacht adds that, in addition to the backgrowth of isnāds leading to a massive increase in
the number of ‘hadiths,’ jurists and hadith scholars also created ‘parallel’ isnāds to help avert
the arguments made by Mu‘tazilites who rejected the use of hadiths with a limited number of
chains of transmission.76 To avoid the stylistic awkwardness of putting what were clearly legal
statements made by early Muslim scholars in the mouth of Muhammad, Schacht explains that
the circumstances and contextual details of legal hadiths were added to provide ‘an authentic
touch.’77
Schacht’s understanding of the early Islamic legal tradition and his Common Link Theory
became the dominant vision of the hadith tradition among Western scholars and has exercised
tremendous influence. This approach was elaborated further by the Dutch scholar G.H.A.
Juynboll (d. 2010), one of the leading proponents of what we have termed the Orientalist
school.
While acknowledging that the origins of what became hadith literature no doubt occurred in
the life the Prophet, Juynboll adds that ‘surely it is unlikely that we will ever find even a
moderately successful method of proving with incontrovertible certainty the histor-icity of the
ascription of such to the prophet but in a few isolated instances.’ Too many of the Companions,
he continues, were credited ‘with such colossal numbers of obviously forged traditions that it
is no longer feasible to conceive of a foolproof method to sift authentic from falsely ascribed
material.’78
If it is beyond the historian’s means to prove that the Prophet did say something, Juynboll
certainly believes that one can prove that he did not say something. He does this by dating
when the hadith came into existence. Building on Schacht’s Common Link Theory, Juynboll

 asserts that the more people transmit a hadith from a scholar, ‘the more historicity that moment
has.’ In other words, the more people narrated a hadith from a transmitter, the more attestation
there is that the hadith actually existed at the time.79 It must therefore have been forged at some
earlier date.
Any links in an isnād that lack such multiple attestations are of dubious historical reliability,
especially in light of the supposed adoration that early Muslims had for hadiths and their
preservation. Juynboll asks, if the Prophet had really uttered a certain hadith in the presence of
his devoted followers, how do we explain why he ‘should choose to convey his saying about
[a topic] to just one companion, and why this companion should choose to convey it to just one
successor?’80 For Juynboll, then, the only historically verifiable ‘moment’ in the transmission
of a hadith occurs with a Common Link. Because it is inconceivable that a real hadith could be
transmitted by only one isnād from the Prophet, anything before this Common Link must have
been fabricated by him or her.81
Juynboll feels that concluding that a hadith must have been forged because more
transmissions of it do not exist (an argument e silentio) is well justified. Since Muslim hadith
scholars habitually collected all the available transmissions of a hadith they could find, their
omission of any transmission must entail that it did not exist.82
In his case-by-case analysis of many hadiths, Juynboll develops a jargon for describing the
different phenomena of isnād fabrication. As is illustrated in Figure 9.1, we see that the hadith
has a clear Common Link, whom Juynboll would accuse of attributing the hadith to the Prophet
along with a suitable isnād. We also find two other transmissions of the hadith besides that of
the Common Link, one through the Common Link’s source and another through a second
Companion. Since there is no historical way to verify the existence of these two alternative
transmissions (they lack a Common Link), they must have been forged by a transmitter or
collector to provide an alternative chain of transmission, perhaps with a more elevated isnād,
to that of the Common Link. Juynboll terms these alternative transmissions ‘Diving’ isnāds.83 A
hadith that has no Common Link, only a set of unrelated ‘diving’ chains (which Juynboll terms
a ‘spider’), is not historically datable in any sense.84
Juynboll’s judgment on ‘diving’ chains of transmission leads him to dismiss the whole notion
of corroborating transmissions (mutāba‘a) among Muslim hadith scholars. Because these
chains of transmission appear independently and lack any Common Link, they cannot be
verified and should be assumed to be forgeries. They are simply plagiarisms of the Common
Link’s isnāds to make the hadith seem more reliable. Juynboll notes that it ‘never ceases to
astonish’ him that master Muslim hadith scholars like Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalānī did not realize
that corroborating isnāds were in fact groundless fabrications.85
 

 Figure 9.1 Juynboll’s Common Link Theory
 
As his treatment of corroborating transmissions suggests, Juynboll feels that the Muslim
methods of hadith criticism were wholly ineffective at weeding out forged hadiths. First of all,
he says, the science of hadith criticism emerged far too late to judge with any reliability what
transpired in the early period of hadith forgery in the late seventh and early eighth centuries.
Second, the methods of hadith critics did not consider the possibility that isnāds could be made
up wholesale, a fact that rendered the proof value of any corroborating isnāds null. Juynboll
notes that the phenomenon Muslim critics called tadlīs (obfuscation in transmission, see
Chapter 3) would have allowed disingenuous forgers to attribute a hadith to an earlier
respected scholar. He claims that tadlīs ‘was hardly ever detected.’ Finally, he follows
Goldziher in asserting the ‘near absence of application of suitable criteria’ for content
criticism by early hadith critics.86
Like Goldziher and Schacht, Juynboll concludes that the ‘programmatic’ production of
hadiths started after the death of the Companions, with the standardization of the isnād format
taking place in the 680s and 690s.87 Following those earlier Orientalists, he agrees that hadiths
originated as the exhortatory material of storytellers and preachers and only later addressed
topics of Islamic law. Most of what Muslims considered to be the most reliable hadiths
probably emerged in the 700s to 720s, when Muslim scholars began to invest the Sunna of the
Prophet with ultimate authority and when the backgrowth of isnāds allowed material to be
manufactured to furnish the Prophet’s legacy. While Schacht had identified the backgrowth of
an isnād if he found a Prophetic hadith in a collection like Sahīh al-Bukhārī that had appeared
in an earlier collection as a statement of a Companion or Successor, Juynboll generalized this

 conclusion. Even if you cannot find a Companion/Successor opinion that corresponds to a
Prophetic hadith, the fact that so many hadiths seem to have originated from these kinds of non-
Prophetic statements makes ‘any “prophetic” saying suspect as also belonging to that genre.’88
Using information provided by Muslim hadith critics and collectors themselves, Juynboll
offers proof for the massive multiplication of hadiths in this period. In the earliest sources
available, he says, major hadith transmitters like Ibn ‘Abbās were described as narrating as
few as nine hadiths from the Prophet. Yet by the time Ibn Hanbal compiled his vast Musnad in
the first half of the 800s he collected 1,710 narrations from Ibn ‘Abbās (although Juynboll
admits that these included repetitions of the same hadith).89
Beyond the backgrowth of isnāds, in his numerous articles Juynboll criticized a variety of
other concepts developed by Muslim hadith critics. He challenges the provenance of the isnād
that Muslim critics considered one of the most reliable: Mālik 
 Nāfi‘ 
 Ibn ‘Umar 
Prophet, by claiming that the transmitter Nāfi‘, the client of Ibn ‘Umar, did not really exist as a
major hadith narrator. Arguing that Nāfi‘ cannot be established as a Common Link, and pointing
to the fact that the early transmission critic Ibn Sa‘d (d. 230/845) did not describe him as a
noteworthy hadith transmitter, Juynboll concludes that Mālik and other early scholars simply
invented Nāfi‘ as a useful tool for anchoring their own legal opinions in the words of the
Prophet.90
Juynboll also challenges the notion that attaining the level of mutawātir in the eyes of Muslim
critics in any way guaranteed the authenticity of a hadith. Using his Common Link method on
the famous hadith of ‘Whoever lies about me intentionally, let him prepare a seat for
himself in Hell,’ Juynboll claims that Common Link analysis cannot establish it as reaching
back to the Prophet. He thus concludes that if the most famous mutawātir hadith cannot be
proven to be authentic according to his methods, then the whole idea of mutawātir hadiths ‘is
no guarantee for the historicity of a h.adīth’s ascription to the prophet.’91
THE PHILO-ISLAMIC APOLOGY
Orientalist criticisms of hadiths quickly elicited responses from Muslim scholars. Although he
affirmed many of Muir’s critiques of the hadith tradition, the Indian Islamic modernist, Sir
Sayyid Ahmad Khan (d. 1898) retorted that Muir’s assumption that the bulk of hadith
transmitters were engaged in deliberate misrepresentation stemmed from his anti-Muslim bias.
Furthermore, Khan accuses Muir of supporting his accusations of the political and sectarian
motivations behind hadith forgery using as evidence the same reports he had deemed
historically unreliable.92
Later, more in-depth responses to Orientalist criticisms came from scholars working and
trained in Western universities who did not wholly agree with Goldziher, Schacht, and their
followers. From the 1960s to the 1980s, a number of scholars, most of them from Muslim or
Middle Eastern backgrounds, challenged Orientalist conclusions either wholly or in part. The
most influential challenge came from Nabia Abbott (d. 1981) (a Christian from Iraq and later
professor at the University of Chicago) who based her book Studies in Arabic Literary Papyri
II: Qur’ānic Commentary and Tradition (1967) on a selection of early Arabic papyrus

 documents from the second half of the eighth and the early ninth centuries.
Abbott presents an interesting challenge to Goldziher’s theory that the Umayyad government,
with its agents like al-Zuhrī, instituted hadith collection and actively fabricated a substantial
component of the hadith corpus pursuant to their political agenda. Evidence from our earliest
sources on the origins of hadith study, she contends, portrays the Umayyads as concerned first
and foremost with collecting the Prophet’s teachings on administrative issues like taxes and
charity, not with material connected to the political image of their rule. She notes how the first
state attempt to collect hadiths, ordered by the caliph ‘Umar b. ‘Abd al-‘Azīz (d. 101/720),
was limited to administrative hadiths. The hadiths that al-Zuhrī collected for the Umayyads for
promulgation in the provinces dealt only with charitable tithes (sadaqa).93 Abbott argues that
the ‘family isnāds’ like those from Nāfi‘ 
Ibn ‘Umar or al-‘Alā’ b. ‘Abd al-Rahmān 
 his
father 
 Abū Hurayra emerged far earlier and were far more numerous than previously
imagined. Umayyad rulers were attempting to make these private collections public, not
ordering the forgery and circulation of baseless hadiths.94
Abbott also rebuts the argument that the exponential increase in the number of hadiths in the
eighth and ninth centuries proves that hadiths were being forged en masse. First of all, she
notes that even early written collections of hadith could be sizable: al-Hasan al-Basrī’s sahīfa
was a scroll six inches in diameter. Certainly, however, early written collections were much
smaller than the great hadith compendia of the ninth century. Al-Zuhrī’s library could be
carried in one bag, while Ibn Hanbal’s was twelve and a half camel loads, and al-Wāqidī’s (d.
207/822) six hundred boxes.95
The explanation for this growth, however, was not necessarily forgery. Papyrus and
parchment were extremely expensive, and scholars could only use them to record the most
basic information about their hadiths, such as the matn with perhaps one isnād. With the arrival
of cheap paper in the Middle East at the end of the eighth century, scholars could afford to
write down every hadith narration they came across. In his famous Musnad, for example, Ibn
Hanbal tried to include an average of seven narrations for every tradition he listed.96 As the
science of hadith collection and criticism developed in the mid eighth century, a ‘hadith’
became identified with its isnād, not with its matn. As ninth-century scholars obsessively
collected all the various transmissions (each called a ‘hadith’) of one tradition, the number of
‘hadiths’ multiplied rapidly. As isnāds developed and became interlaced, this number
increased even more, while the actual number of Prophetic traditions remained relatively
small.97
Abbott’s challenging some of the Orientalist attacks on the Sunni hadith tradition, however,
did not mean that she embraced it fully. She notes that the widespread disagreement between
Muslim critics on the reliability of a transmitter or isnād ‘nullified’ the real effectiveness of the
Muslim science of hadith as a critical tool.98 Abbott provides perhaps the most insightful
explanation of how so much forged mater-ial did appear. Since Muslim hadith critics treated
hadiths dealing with law much more severely than those that they used in exhortatory preaching
(al-targhīb wa al-tarhīb), the type of matn greatly affected the critical stringency with which
the hadith was treated. Much of the material forged in areas such as exhortatory preaching thus

 survived because Muslims allowed it to.99
A vigorous rebuttal of Orientalist scholarship came from an Indian scholar who studied at
Cambridge University, Muhammad Mustafa al-Azami. In two books, Studies in Early H.adīth
Literature (1978) and On Schacht’s Origins of Muhammadan Jurisprudence (1984), Azami
attacked Schacht’s work (and also that of Goldziher) and those who had relied on his
conclusions. One of the points for which Azami takes Goldziher and Schacht to task is the
substantial inferences they make without any conclusive evidence. Goldziher, for example, had
concluded that the Umayyad state had sponsored hadith forgery based on the fact that certain
hadiths seemed to support Umayyad interests and that certain transmitters were linked to the
court. Certainly, Azami acknowledges that the Umayyads fought groups like the Shiites. But he
contends that there is no evidence of an official or unofficial Umayyad directive to fabricate
hadiths for the cause of the state (here we should note that the historian al-Madā’inī did adduce
evidence for this; see Chapter 3).100
One of Azami’s principal objections to Schacht is his reliance on a small number of sources
to reach broad generalizations. Azami begins his discussion by pointing out how few sources
Schacht had relied on and drawing attention to the numerous early Arabic manuscripts that had
been discovered since his time. Western scholars of hadiths, he states, should update their data
instead of parroting Schacht uncritically.101 Azami states that Schacht based his conclusions on
the Muwatta’ of Mālik and the Umm of al-Shāfi‘ī, but he ‘imposed the results of his study on
the entire h.adīth literature.’102 Moreover, one of the isnāds that Schacht relies on for his
evidence that isnāds grew backwards in Mālik’s case was an instance in which later Muslim
hadith critics believed Mālik had made a mistake. Schacht thus took an error on Mālik’s part as
an example of the rule instead of an exception to it.103
Azami also accuses Schacht of fundamentally misunderstanding the realities of early Islamic
legal scholarship.104 Schacht’s argument e silentio, where a scholar failing to mention a hadith
or a complete isnād meant that the hadith or that complete isnād must not have existed at that
time, is flawed. A legal expert (muftī), Azami argues, often answered questions without
documenting the evidence he had used in arriving at his conclusion or without providing a full
isnād for his hadiths. Azami provides an example from al-Shāfi‘ī’s famous Risāla, where al-
Shāfi‘ī provides an incomplete isnād for a hadith but excuses himself because he did not have
with him the book that included his more complete isnād for that hadith.105
Finally, Azami devotes a large portion of his books to attempting to prove that Muslims had
begun writing down hadiths and even using the isnād during the time of the Prophet and his
Companions. Here, he relies on surviving sources from the eighth and ninth centuries which
mention earlier written sources. He does this in order to disprove Schacht’s claim that
Prophetic hadiths only appeared as isnāds grew backwards, a claim Schacht based in part on a
lack of books surviving from the first two centuries of Islam that could serve as evidence that
Muslims had recorded hadiths during that time.106 Of course, here Azami relies on Muslims’
testimony about their own thoroughness in hadith collection – a biased source that some
Orientalists would not believe to begin with.

 THE REVISIONIST APPROACH AND THE CATEGORICAL REJECTION OF THE MUSLIM NARRATIVE
Orientalists such as Goldziher, Schacht, and Juynboll had questioned the authenticity of
individual hadiths and established a skeptical outlook towards hadith literature as a genre, but
they did not doubt the overall narrative of the Prophet’s life and Islamic origins. Muhammad
was still assumed to have been a merchant from Mecca who had preached the monotheistic
‘religion of Abraham’ to his peers in Mecca before fleeing the city to establish a new Muslim
community in Medina. Orientalists never questioned that he had claimed to receive revelations
in the form of the Quran and had engaged in known conflicts with his enemies with the help of
his famous cadre of Companions.
From 1977 to 1979, however, a series of studies demanded that the Historical Critical
Method be applied fully and consistently to early Islamic history. If historians were supposed
to adopt a skeptical attitude towards obviously biased sources and attempt to rely on the
earliest, best documented evidence possible, why had Western historians believed the grand
Muslim narrative of Islam’s origins at all? After all, the history of the Prophet’s life, message,
and community was told solely by Muslims, and there were no surviving textual sources from
before the mid 700s, a full century after the Prophet’s death. This would have provided ample
time for Muslim scholars and historians – certainly not impartial in their activities – to
construct whatever legacy they wanted for their ‘Prophet’ from scratch. This Revisionist
criticism of the Orientalists applied equally to scholars like Azami who had objected to their
critiques, for Azami had also relied on sources written down long after the first generations of
Islam to reconstruct the early collection of hadiths.
Two scholars, Patricia Crone (d. 2015) and Michael Cook, proposed rewriting early Islamic
history using the earliest written sources on Islam, which had the added benefit of not being
written by Muslims. On the basis of a set of surviving Christian religious writings dating from
as early as 634 CE, Crone’s and Cook’s book Hagarism (1977) proposed that Islam had
actually been a late version of apocalyptical Judaism in which the Arabs of the Hejaz had
rediscovered their Abrahamic roots and sought to retake the Holy Land of Palestine. Clearly,
this was a very different history than the detailed account of Muhammad’s life and teachings
given in the hadith literature!
The novel contribution of the Revisionist approach was not the mechanics of criticizing the
hadith tradition, but the scale of skepticism. Crone, for example, espouses Schacht’s and
Juynboll’s theory about the backgrowth of isnāds and the conclusion that hadiths cannot really
tell us anything about Islam before the year c. 100/720. Crone seconds the Orientalist critique
that hadiths transmitted by Muslims reflect ‘what the Prophet meant to them, not what the
generation before them had taken him to say, let alone what he had said or done in his own
particular time and place.’107
 

 Figure 9.2 Cook’s Theory of Tadlīs and Spread of Isnāds
 
In her work on the origins of Islamic law, Roman, Provincial and Islamic Law (1987),
Crone’s severe doubt about the reliability of the Islamic historical tradition leads her to a new
degree of skepticism towards the hadith corpus as a whole. ‘[I]n the field of substantive law,’
she argues, ‘traditions attributed to the Prophet must indeed be presumed to be inauthentic.’108
As an example, she takes one hadith that ‘practically all’ Orientalists had considered authentic:
the famous ‘Constitution’ of Medina, the agreement between Muhammad and the Jews of
Medina in which all parties agreed to be part of one ‘community (umma)’. (Orientalists
regarded this as authentic in part because it seems to contradict the orthodox Islamic notion that
non-Muslims could not join Muslims in their religious polity, an example of the Principle of
Dissimilarity at work.) Concerning the legal issue of patronage (walā’), early scholars like Ibn
Jurayj (d. 150/767) and Ma‘mar b. Rāshid (d. 153/770) had forbidden its sale or transfer, but
they narrated no Prophetic hadiths to that effect. Based on Schacht’s and Juynboll’s argument e
silentio, that would mean that no hadiths on that topic existed at their time. In the ‘Constitution’
of Medina found in the Sīra of Ibn Ishāq (d. 150/767), however, we find a statement by the
Prophet banning the transfer of walā’. This hadith must have therefore been altered to meet this
legal agenda sometime around the 770s CE.109

 If even a report that Orientalists had felt confident about was not historically reliable, then
what hadith could have escaped the ingenuous designs of early Muslim scholars? ‘The chance
of authentic material surviving at their hands is exceedingly small,’ Crone contends. ‘Indeed, in
purely statistical terms it is minute.’ She reminds her readers of figures Juynboll had collected
about the growth of the numbers of hadiths supposedly narrated by Ibn ‘Abbās. If there had
been this massive increase, how do we know which ones Ibn ‘Abbās really transmitted?
‘Under such circumstances it is scarcely justified to presume h.adīth to be authentic until the
contrary has been proven.’ Since this is very difficult indeed, ‘then the presumption must be
that no h.adīth is authentic.’110
Crone (Meccan Trade and the Rise of Islam, 1987), and the scholars John Wansbrough
(Quranic Studies, 1977) and John Burton (Introduction to Hadith, 1994) also stressed the
exegetical origins of hadiths. In other words, hadiths were often created by Muslim scholars to
help them explain the meaning of the Quran. Early Muslims disagreed on the meanings of many
Quranic verses, so the hadiths produced to explain its meaning differed too.111
Although Revisionists generally built on the conclusions of the Orientalists, Michael Cook
argues that even a key concession they had made – that a Common Link was a historically
reliable moment in transmission – was wrong. Cook offers a novel argument as to how Muslim
hadith transmitters were able to multiply the number of narrations of a hadith and, in essence,
fabricate a Common Link. Juynboll had noted how tadlīs allowed disingenuous forgers to
attribute a hadith to an earlier scholar by falsely inserting his name in the isnād. Cook saw an
even more prominent role for tadlīs. In a traditional society, Cook explains, ‘the relevant issue
is not originality, but authority: sharp practice consists in falsely ascribing my view to a
greater authority than myself.’112
Tadlīs was the means by which a hadith transmitter accomplished this. As shown in Figure
9.2, if C2 hears a hadith from his contemporary C1, who had heard it from his teacher B1 from
A, and so on from the Prophet, C2 does not want to appear to be deriving religious knowledge
from a peer. He therefore attributes it to the generation of his teachers, citing the hadith from
his instructor B2 and extending the isnād back to A, et cetera. If history preserves both C1’s
and C2’s isnāds, then it seems as though two chains of transmission eman-ated from A, when in
reality there was only one. This accounts for the fraudulent spread of isnāds. By asserting that
the matns of certain eschatological hadiths clearly emerged later than the Common Link in their
isnāds, Cook argued that dating by Common Links was naive.113
THE WESTERN REVALUATION
The fundamental doubts that Revisionist scholarship raised about early Islamic history
prompted an unprecedented defense of the trad-itional narrative of hadiths and Islamic origins
on the part of certain Western scholars. In a sense, regardless of the specific criticisms Western
scholars might have launched at individual hadiths, they had heavily invested in the basic
outline of Islamic history provided by Muslim historians and hadith scholars. To defend the
overall integrity of the hadith tradition was to defend the vision of early Islamic history on
which generations of Western scholars had relied.

 What we are calling here ‘Revaluation’ scholars have challenged two main aspects of
Orientalist and Revisionist criticisms of hadiths. First, they have argued that many of the basic
assumptions made by these two groups are inherently inaccurate. Second, Revaluation scholars
have demonstrated that earlier Western criticisms did not take into account the massive breadth
and complexity of the Islamic hadith tradition. When hadiths are looked at from this more
humble perspective, many of the arguments advanced by Orientalists and Revisionists lose
their efficacy.
This does not mean that Revaluation scholars have accepted the Sunni vision of hadiths and
their authenticity outright. While rejecting the Revisionist arguments, Fred Donner and others
have espoused a theory that until the time of the Umayyad caliph ‘Abd al-Mālik (d. 86/705),
Islam as a religious ideology was very pluralistic and allowed both Christians and Jews to
follow Muhammad’s teachings without abandoning their own religions.114 Nonetheless, the tone
of Revaluation scholars is less combative than earlier generations. They speak more of ‘dating’
when we can be sure a hadith was in circulation than deeming it forged and identifying who
forged it.
The most basic objection to the Revisionist recasting of the whole Muslim narrative of early
Islamic history is that it simply asks us to believe too much. We might find it difficult to
believe that Muslims could avoid all the pitfalls of historical manipulation, propagandizing,
and error in their collection of hadiths, but it seems even harder to believe that a scholarly
community stretching from Spain to Central Asia and plagued by intense internecine conflicts
could have orchestrated such a colossal historical conspiracy in a time of pre-modern
communication. As Fred Donner states in his rebuttal of the Revisionists, it is inconceivable
that the divided and decentralized early Muslim community could somehow orchestrate a
‘comprehensive redaction of the [Islamic] tradition as a whole into a unified form’115 without
leaving ample historical evidence. Similarly, Harald Motzki notes that the forgery of hadiths on
the massive scale suggested by Orientalists and Revisionists would have been prevented by the
communal oversight of hadith scholars.116
Some scholars have revaluated the standing assumptions that Orientalists and Revisionists
had made about the overall authenticity of hadiths. Crone had stressed what Goldziher,
Schacht, and Juynboll had implied: no hadith could be assumed to be the authentic words of
Muhammad. This point is contested most overtly by David Powers, who is also an early
pioneer of what can be termed the ‘large-scale’ identification of Common Links, or the notion
that when one collects all the available transmissions of a hadith, its Common Link is much
earlier than those supposed by Schacht and Juynboll.
In an article about wills and bequests in early Islamic law, Powers challenged Crone’s and
Cook’s dismissal of a famous hadith in which the Prophet tells the Companion Sa‘d b. Abī
Waqqās that he may only specify one third of his wealth for his daughter (the rest is automatic-
ally divided by existing Islamic inheritance law). Powers argues that examining the isnāds and
matn of the hadith suggests that it did in fact originate with Sa‘d b. Abī Waqqās. In light of her
error in evaluating the hadith, Powers concludes that Crone’s statement that Prophetic hadiths
should be assumed to be inauthentic ‘hardly inspires much confidence.’ Quite the opposite,

 Powers asserts that the burden of proof ‘lies on those who would deny the authenticity of
reports attributed to the Prophet.’117 The default assumption is that a hadith is actually
authentic.
Power’s argument for dating this hadith at the very latest during the time of the Companions
rested on an examination of all the extant transmissions of the report – something that Crone
had neglected. He admits that trying to authenticate an isnād and find a Common Link is delving
into the ‘realm of conjecture and speculation,’ but he argues that it seems very unlikely that the
Sa‘d b. Abī Waqqās trad-ition is forged. He collects all the narrations of the tradition, which
emanate from six different individuals who all converge on Sa‘d as the Common Link. Powers
states that it is:
 
either strange or a remarkable coincidence that half a dozen Successors, living in different cities of the Umayyad empire
and presumably working independently of one another, adopted the same story to illustrate the origins of the one-third
restriction, tracing it back to the Prophet by means of fabricated isnāds, all of which converge on one and the same
Companion.118
 
The ‘large-scale’ analysis of transmission and fundamental questioning of Orientalist and
Revisionist assumptions has continued in force in the scholarship of the German Harald
Motzki. In a sense, Motzki is the first Western scholar to treat hadiths with the same ‘respect’
as Muslim hadith masters did. Like figures such as Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalānī, his judgments about
hadiths depend on collecting all the available narrations of the report, not just the ones easily
accessible in well-known collections.
Motzki’s work proffers three main criticisms of previous Western hadith scholarship. First,
he argues that the argument e silentio relied upon by Schacht, Juynboll, and Crone is invalid.
Second, he demonstrates that Common Links are much earlier than previously thought, dating
some to the time of the Companions in the second half of the seventh century. Finally, Motzki
argues that, rather than being consummate forgers of hadiths, major hadith transmitters such as
al-Zuhrī and Ibn Jurayj were in general reliably passing on reports from the previous
generation.
Orientalists and Revisionists had relied on the premise that an early scholar’s failure to
employ a Prophetic hadith, or the best possible version of that hadith, in a debate in which it
would have been pertinent proves that this Prophetic hadith did not exist at that time or in that
form.119 Motzki argues that this assumption is both unreasonable and inaccurate. A scholar
could decide not to mention a hadith because he did not feel that it actually addressed the issue
at hand. Especially in the time of early legal synthesists like Abū Hanīfa and Mālik, hadiths
were still distributed regionally. We already saw the example of Mālik’s Egyptian student
informing him of a reliable hadith about washing one’s feet that Mālik, who never left the
Hejaz, had never heard.
As for the assumption that if a hadith was transmitted via only one isnād in the early period
then it must have been forged, Motzki argues that we should not expect to find numerous isnāds
from figures like the Successors back to the Prophet. Isnāds, after all, only came into use
during the Successors’ generation in the late 600s/early 700s. Even for those early hadith

 transmitters and legal scholars who provided isnāds to the Prophet at that time, it was only
necessary to provide one isnād for a hadith, not a bundle as became common in the second half
of the 700s and the 800s.
As for Juynboll’s argument that Muslims obsessively transmitted hadiths, with hundreds of
students attending their teachers’ dictation sessions, common sense tells us that there are many
reasons why history preserved one person’s transmission from that teacher instead of those of
many students. Just as only a small percentage of a teacher’s students go on to become teachers
themselves, so it is not inconceivable that only one of a hadith transmitter’s students would go
on to become a transmitter as well. Juynboll had argued that only the transmission of one to
many can be considered a historically documented ‘moment’ in the life of a hadith. But, Motzki
counters, if we only consider transmission from one person to a number of people historic-ally
reliable, then why do we have only a few hadith collections or Partial Common Links
(Common Links that form in the transmission of a hadith after the Common Link, see Figure
9.1)? If we have established that the hadith came into existence with the Common Link, and that
any hadith that actually existed must have been transmitted by all those who heard it from a
teacher, then after the Common Links we should find thousands of chains of transmission in the
fourth and fifth generations. The fact that we find so few Partial Common Links strongly
suggests that Common Links and Partial Common Links were the exception rather than the rule
in the transmission of hadiths. Their absence thus cannot be construed as proof for a hadith not
existing at that time.
One of Motzki’s central criticisms of Schacht’s and Juynboll’s work is the small number of
sources from which they drew hadiths in determining the Common Link. In collecting
transmissions of a hadith to locate a Common Link, for example, Juynboll relied principally on
the Tuhfat al-ashrāf of Jamāl al-Dīn al-Mizzī (d. 742/1341), a work that collects together all
the chains of transmission for a hadith but is limited to the traditions and transmissions found in
the Six Books (and a few other small books). Motzki draws on a much larger and more diverse
body of sources including early ones, such as the Musannaf of ‘Abd al-Razzāq al-San‘ānī (d.
211/827), and later ones, such as al-Bayhaqī’s (d. 458/1066) Dalā’il al-nubuwwa. By
consulting a much wider range of sources than these earlier scholars, Motzki demonstrates that
the Common Links for the hadiths he analyzes actually belong to the time of the Companions in
the second half of the seventh century.
Motzki lays out his rebuttal of Schacht’s and Juynboll’s Common-Link-as-forger argument
most clearly in an article devoted to studying the hadiths related to the Prophet’s order that a
prominent Jewish leader in Khaybar, Ibn Abī Huqayq, be assassinated. By gathering together a
tremendous array of chains of transmission from a wide variety of sources, Motzki
demonstrates that this hadith has not one Common Link but several who were working
independently and thus must have relied on some earlier common source. In the case of the
killing of Ibn Abī Huqayq, Motzki concludes that the common link transmitters of hadiths
relating to the event probably received their reports no later than the last third of the seventh
century.120 The hadith was circulating during the time of the Companions.
Motzki’s ‘large-scale’ analysis of hadith transmission is based on a method of analyzing the

 isnād and matn together (termed isnād 
cum matn analysis). He explains that this process relies on three premises:
 
1 Variants of a tradition are (at least partially) the result of a process of transmission.
2 The isnāds of the variants reflect (at least partially) the actual path of transmission.
3 If variant texts (matns) of a tradition emanating from the same common link are in fact
similar enough, then it seems to be an authentic moment of transmission. If they are not
similar, this is the result of either carelessness or intentional manipulation of the material.121
 
In order to determine whether the basic information found in the text of the hadith originated
from before a Common Link, you must see if different Common Links all have the same basic
matn. This requires a two-step process: 1) analyzing the elements of the different matn variants
from all the chains of transmission emanating from one Common Link; 2) comparing the
conclusions about the common material from that Common Link to the matn elements of other
Common Links.122 One must then ask whether the differences between the versions of the matn
from the two Common Links are significant enough to preclude the possibility that one copied
from the other and then provided his hadith with a different isnād.123 If two variants of the same
text from two separate Common Links are too disparate to be dependent on each other, then
they must stem from an earlier common source. In order to verify this conclusion, one must
determine whether variants on the common matn correlate with the chains of transmission. In
other words, do the variants of the common story (matn) match the isnād tree?124
We can demonstrate this method of isnād cum matn analysis with a famous hadith stating that
God descends at some point in the night to answer prayers (see Figure 9.3). Strictly speaking,
isnād cum matn analysis must take into consideration all the extant transmissions of a hadith.
Since that would be far too time-consuming for our purposes, we will only focus on those
narrations that yield the sort of benefit associated with this type of analysis. In particular, we
will look at two narrations of the hadith, one from Abū Hurayra and one from another
Companion, Abū Sa‘īd al-Khudrī.
 

 Figure 9.3 Isnād/Matn Analysis
 
We find the narration of Abū Hurayra recorded earliest in the Muwatta’ of Mālik, which
means that we know that the hadith was in existence at the very latest during the mid eighth
century when Mālik was writing. Mālik’s fellow student of al-Zuhrī, Ma‘mar b. Rāshid, had
this transmission as well as the other version from Abū Sa‘īd al-Khudrī. Examining, the two
matns, we find that they contain the same general tradition but also feature noticeable
differences. Matn 1, for example, states that God descends in the last third of the night, while
Matn 2 says He descends after the first third. Matn 2 also includes the unique wording ‘God
bides His time.’ Since we know the tradition existed with Ma‘mar, but the differences between
his two versions of the hadith preclude him having copied one from the other, he must have
obtained the Abū Sa‘īd version from an earlier source other than al-Zuhrī. If al-Zuhrī’s source
and Ma‘mar’s second source (presumably Abū Ishāq al-Sabī‘ī) both had two different versions
of the same general hadith, they must have received them from a common source, especially as
Abū Ishāq was from Kufa and al-Zuhrī from the Hejaz. Since al-Zuhrī and Abū Ishāq, both
Successors, died in 742–3 CE and 744–6 CE respectively, their common source must have
lived in the late seventh century, which demonstrates that the hadith was in existence during the
time of the later Companions.
One of the key sources that Motzki uses in his investigation is the Musannaf of ‘Abd al-
Razzāq al-San‘ānī (d. 211/827). In a series of articles in the early 1990s, Motzki used the
Musannaf to prove that Schacht’s conclusions about the reliability of legal hadiths were

 tainted by the narrow range of sources he consulted and a hypothesis-driven analysis by which
Schacht judged the provenance of early legal material based on flawed assumptions about the
nature of early Islamic legal scholarship.
In one article, Motzki takes up the material that ‘Abd al-Razzāq included in his Musannaf
through the well-known isnād of Ibn Jurayj (d. 150/767) 
 the famous Meccan Successor
‘Atā’ b. Abī Rabāh (d. 114/732). Motzki argues that both ‘Abd al-Razzāq’s and Ibn Jurayj’s
material and their manner of presenting it exhibits two startling characteristics that dispel the
likelihood that they forged or intentionally misrepresented reports they transmitted. First, the
characteristics of transmissions via the isnād are entirely consistent both in their form and
content. Thus, both ‘Abd al-Razzāq and his source Ibn Jurayj always use the term ‘I heard it
from (sami‘tu) …’ for some of their sources, while they use ‘on the authority of (‘an)’
consistently for others. If either of these authorities were ‘back projecting’ their own legal
views on to earlier authorities, Motzki argues, it is improbable that they could have maintained
such formal consistency in their forgery.125 Second, ‘Abd al-Razzāq admits to not knowing the
exact origins of some of the hadiths in his collection, and Ibn Jurayj often admits to not
understanding either the meaning or the wordings of the reports he transmits.126 Moreover, in
his narrations from ‘Atā’ b. Abī Rabāh, Ibn Jurayj sometimes posed questions directly to this
scholar and sometimes heard his opinions second or even third hand. Including less direct
transmissions when he could have easily claimed to have heard ‘Atā’ first hand suggests that
Ibn Jurayj was forthcoming about such transmissions.127
Based on this evidence, Motzki argues that ‘Abd al-Razzāq and Ibn Jurayj both faithfully
transmitted the material they received. Since there is thus little likelihood that the hadiths
narrated by Ibn Jurayj from Atā’ b. Abī Rabāh were forged, they can be seen as authentic
representations of Muslim legal scholarship in Mecca in the late seventh and early eighth
centuries.128
In another 1991 article, Motzki continues to use the Musannaf of ‘Abd al-Razzāq as a tool to
correct Schacht’s conclusions about early Islamic legal hadiths, in particular legal material
ascribed to the famous al-Zuhrī. Motzki compares the legal hadiths narrated by al-Zuhrī’s
students Ma‘mar b. Rāshid and Ibn Jurayj from their teacher with material found in the book of
another of al-Zuhrī’s students, Mālik. By proving that both the hadiths from Ma‘mar/Ibn Jurayj
and Mālik came from a common source, presumably al-Zuhrī, Motzki suggests that material
attributed to al-Zuhrī actually came from him. Especially in the case of Ma‘mar and Ibn Jurayj,
their narrations bear no signs of intended forgery. These scholars drew on very diverse
sources, and they readily transmitted hadiths or scholarly opinions that disagreed with their
own stances. If they were using these transmissions only as a means to promote their own legal
agenda, why would they transmit reports that disagreed with them?
Motzki devotes special attention to a bizarre report that al-Zuhrī attributes to one of the
Prophet’s Companions who allowed grown men to become related to women by breast-feeding
from them. By establishing the transmission from al-Zuhrī and then showing that the material
that al-Zuhrī reported was in itself compiled from several sources, Motzki argues that the
Common Link for this report is in fact the Companion who supposedly said it in the second half

 of the seventh century. That al-Zuhrī personally disagreed with the Companion ruling he
transmits (he did not approve of the practice of grown men suckling) testifies to his integrity as
a transmitter.129
CONCLUSION: QUESTIONS ABOUT ASSUMPTIONS
Motzki raises some other interesting questions about the assumptions made by Schacht and
Juynboll, assumptions that, I think, we can trace back to the Historical Critical Method itself.
Extreme skeptics of the hadith tradition are motivated by the historical-critical approach of the
Western tradition, which asks whether we should believe what historical sources tell us.
However, sometimes doubting these sources obliges us to believe things more fantastical than
simply accepting that the source might be authentic. Juynboll assumes that all ‘diving’ chains of
transmission, all corroborating chains, and in fact any chain of transmission that does not
emanate from a Common Link are forged (see Figure 9.1). But why? In the example of the
hadith of God’s descent at night, the only Common Link is the Companion Abu Hurayra. There
are seven other chains of transmission through other Companions (not listed in Figure 9.3); are
we to suppose that all these other chains coming from the Prophet, via different Companions,
all with slight variations in the matn that are dispersed with total consistency among these
different chains, are all fabricated? All this in a period of a hundred and fifty years (about the
time that the earliest surviving written source for this hadith, the Muwatta’, was produced)
within a circle of scholars who exerted a great deal of effort to prevent material from being
forged wholesale about the Prophet? It seems more likely that the Prophet actually said that
God descends at night to answer men’s prayers. As Motzki points out, there is a certain a
priori doubt about the reliability of the Muslim hadith tradition that may be totally groundless.
Western historians are of course totally right to point out the suspicious anachronism in a
hadith in which the Prophet says, ‘If you see Mu‘āwiya on my pulpit, kill him,’ or the even
more outrageous hadith of ‘There will be in my community a man named Muhammad b.
Idrīs [al-Shāfi‘ī], and the strife he brings will be worse than Satan.’ But prominent Muslim
hadith critics like Ibn ‘Adī, al-Jawzaqānī, and al-Dhahabī also considered the hadith about
Mu‘āwiya to be unreliable or fabricated outright, and the hadith condemning al-Shāfi‘ī was
used by Muslim scholars as a textbook example of forgery.130
Even though many Muslim scholars considered them unreliable, the hadiths condemning the
Qadarites (qadariyya) appear in collections like the respected Four Sunan. Certainly, it seems
that the proper name Qadarite did not develop for over a century after the death of the
Prophet.131 But jumping to dismiss these hadiths as forgeries due to the anachronism of the
Prophet ‘foretelling’ this sect’s emergence is hasty. Western scholars might not accept that the
Prophet could know the future, but the Quran clearly engages the questions of free will and
predestination. Some Muslims in Muhammad’s time could well have angered him by
advocating the idea that God did not control human actions, so it is not unreasonable that he
might have warned them against this. Crucially, for every hadith in which the Prophet
condemns the Qadarites by this proper name there is a corresponding, non-anachronistic
narration in which he refers to them as ‘the people of qadar’ or ‘those who disbelieve in

 qadar.’ In fact, these non-anachronistic narrations are the most reliable ones according to
Muslim scholars. What seems like a clear case of anachronism to Western scholars might
actually be a case in which the Prophet condemned an existing heresy, then some later
transmitters of those hadiths lazily replaced ‘the people of qadar/those who disbelieve in
qadar’ with the conventional label Qadarite as it had emerged in their time.132
Western critics from Goldziher onwards rebuked Muslim hadith scholars for not taking the
contents of a hadith into consideration when analyzing its authenticity. But as we have seen,
Muslim critics like al-Bukhārī did in fact use the contents of hadiths to prove that they were
unreliable, although their degree of skepticism never approached that of the HCM.
Certainly, Muslim hadith critics differ from modern Western criticism in that they believe that
the Prophet could know the future, but perhaps Western scholars could benefit from their
cautious approach. Western reasoning for why the hadith about visiting the three mosques must
be forged rested on the fact that it seemed to promote an Umayyad agenda and that al-Zuhrī,
who was associated with the Umayyad court, is in the isnād.133 But there are other early isnāds
for this hadith that do not have al-Zuhrī in them.134 Should we reconsider our conclusion or
assume, quite without reason, that these other isnāds were forged as well? The Al-Aqsa
Mosque is mentioned in the Quran, so is it so inconceivable that the Prophet would order his
followers to pay special attention to it along with the Haram Mosque in Mecca and his mosque
in Medina?
There is a certain ‘chicken and the egg’ logic to the Western approach to the reliability of
hadiths. Goldziher and others have regularly criticized the hadith, considered sahīh by
Muslims, ‘When you see the black banners approaching from Khurasan, go to them, for
indeed the Messiah (mahdī) is among them,’ which they consider to be a product of Abbasid
revolutionary propaganda (the Abbasids both had black banners and emerged from
Khurasan).135 But we must accept the fact that Muhammad, prophet or not, might actually have
acted like a prophet and prophesied occasionally. Did the Abbasids forge this hadith about the
black banners and the Mahdī, or did they take advantage of an existing hadith and simply tailor
their banners to fit the messianic image that the Prophet had actually described?
Looking outside the Islamic tradition, the Old Testament Book of Zechariah reads, ‘Rejoice
greatly, O Daughter of Zion! Shout, Daughter of Jerusalem! See, your king comes to you,
righteous and having salvation, gentle and riding on a donkey, on a colt, the foal of a donkey’
(Zechariah 9:9). Does the fact that the Gospels describe Jesus entering Jerusalem on a colt or
donkey (Mark 11:1–11; Matthew 21:1–4) mean that Christians made up this part of the Book of
Zechariah to bolster the case for Jesus being a messianic figure (we know this is not true since
the Book of Zechariah predates Christianity)? Or did Jesus really enter Jerusalem (not
unlikely) riding the transport of his day – a donkey (not unlikely) – an event that the Gospel
writers then described in the language of Old Testament scripture to show how Jesus’ life was
part of Old Testament prophecy being fulfilled? Taken further, the entry of the Quaker James
Nayler into the English town of Bristol in 1656, riding on a donkey with women strewing
fronds before him and singing ‘Holy, Holy, Holy’, obviously does not mean that Quakers
concocted the Gospel story. Nayler was simply casting himself in the image of Christ as

 portrayed in scripture.136 Similarly, some of the apparent anachronisms found in hadiths may
simply be Muslims scripturalizing their own actions and history to dovetail with statements
made by Muhammad.
Both Muslim and non-Muslim scholars of hadiths have agreed that there are many forged
hadiths. In my opinion, explaining how this came about involves understanding the choices
made by the Sunni scholarly tradition more than it does doubting the systematic effectiveness of
their method of hadith criticism. In theory as well as practice, the Three-Tiered system of
demanding a source, investigating its reliability and seeking out corroborating evidence is an
effective way of determining the authenticity of a report. Modern reporters, after all, employ a
similar method. Juynboll and Cook cited the practice of tadlīs as the loophole by which hadiths
were attributed to major transmitters or equipped with additional isnāds. Juynboll states that
tadlīs ‘was hardly ever detected.’137 But Muslim hadith scholars from the mid eighth century
onward were obsessive about identifying which transmitters lapsed into tadlīs and when.
Shu‘ba (d. 160/776) said that ‘tadlīs is the brother of lying’ and studied the transmissions of
his teacher Qatāda b. Di‘āma closely to know when he had heard a hadith directly from the
person he was citing and when it was unclear if there was an unspecified intermediary. Yahyā
b. Sa‘īd al-Qattān (d. 198/813) made sure to identify tadlīs even when it was done by as
revered a figure as Sufyān al-Thawrī. Later, master critics like ‘Alī b. al-Madīnī (d. 234/849),
al-Husayn al-Karābīsī (d. 245/859), and others wrote multivolume books identifying the names
of those who committed tadlīs and the degree of their laxity.138
Juynboll states that the critical method of Muslim hadith scholars did not take into account the
possibility that isnāds were fabricated wholesale. But the intensive focus on finding
corroboration in order to evaluate a transmitter was aimed at isolating those individuals who
cited isnāds not backed up by other students of the same teacher. If a transmitter was making up
isnāds wholesale, he would be identified as someone who ‘is not corroborated (lā yutāba‘u
‘alayhi)’ or narrates ‘unacceptable (munkar)’ hadiths. As we discussed in Chapter 2, the
number of hadiths transmitted by Ibn ‘Abbās appears to increase incredulously only when we
forget to distinguish between the relatively small number that Ibn ‘Abbās actually heard from
the Prophet and those in which he said ‘the Prophet said …’ leaving out the older Companion
who had actually told him the hadith.
Clearly, Muslim scholars’ rulings on the reliability of individual hadiths cannot be accepted
without careful examination. But, as Motzki and others have shown, the classical Islamic
method of filtering out forged hadiths was much more effective than earlier scholars like
Goldziher and Juynboll have believed. However, Sunni scholars only chose to apply their
critical methods some of the time. Masters of early Sunni hadith criticism such as Sufyān al-
Thawrī, Ibn al-Mubārak, Ibn Hanbal, Ibn Ma‘īn, and Ibn Abī Hātim al-Rāzī all stressed that
they dealt stringently with the isnāds of hadiths dealing with law and dogma but were lax with
material concerning history (maghāzī), the virtues of people or acts (fadā’il), pious preaching
(wa‘z), the end of days (malāhim), good manners, and the meaning of Quranic terms (tafsīr).
As Abbott stated, this material easily passed through the hadith scholars’ critical filters. These
were the doors that Sunni scholars left open for forged material.

 Al-Tirmidhī’s collection offers a useful example, since he alone provided his own ratings for
each hadith in his book. In chapters dealing with core legal topics, only a relatively small
percentage of hadiths suffer from some lack or corroboration (gharīb): for the chapters on
tithing (zakāt) and fasting (sawm), it is 17%. His chapter on inheritance (farā’id) has only 7%.
Al-Tirmidhī’s chapters on non-legal matters, however, have a much larger percentage of
hadiths that the author himself acknowledges as problematic: apocalyptic strife (fitan) – 35%;
the virtues of various early Muslims (manāqib) – 52%; pious invocations (da‘awāt) – 50%;
and manners (ādāb) – 27%. If corroboration was the keystone of Muslim hadith criticism, then
al-Tirmidhī certainly dropped his critical guard in the non-legal chapters in comparison with
legal ones. It is unfortunate that many of the areas that Western scholars consider the most
important subjects of study – political history, apocalyptic visions, and Quranic exegesis –
were simply not the priorities of Sunni hadith scholars. It is possible that it was prioritization
of law over other areas that led to the inclusion of large numbers of unreliable hadiths in Sunni
collections, not the failings of Sunni hadith-critical methods.
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
A great deal has been written about the Authenticity Question. Students interested in further
reading would be best served by consulting the scholarly works cited in this chapter and its
notes as the next step in examining the topic. In particular, Harald Motzki’s digests of the
various Western approaches to dating and evaluating hadiths in his article, ‘Dating Muslim
Traditions: a Survey,’ Arabica 52, no. 2 (2005): 204–253, and his introduction to the edited
volume on hadiths [H.adīth: Origins and Development, ed. Harald Motzki (Aldershot:
Variorum, 2004), xiii–liii], are extremely useful surveys. A more recent survey of the field is
Andreas Görke, Harald Motzki, and Gregor Schoeler, ‘First Century Sources for the Life of
Muh.ammad? A Debate,’ Der Islam 89, no. 1 (2012), pp. 2–59. The H.adīth: Origins and
Development volume also includes influential pieces on the Authenticity Question from a
number of scholars not mentioned in this chapter and translated from their original languages
into English. Although it is slightly dated, the Guide to Sira and Hadith Literature in Western
Languages, ed. Munawar Anees and Alia N. Athar (London: Mansell Publishing, 1986) is also
useful. Myron Gilmore’s Humanists and Jurists (Cambridge: Belknap Press, 1963), Edgar
Krentz’s The Historical Critical Method (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1975), Anthony
Grafton’s Forgers and Critics (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1990), Owen
Chadwick’s marvelous The Secularization of the European Mind in the 19th Century
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975), Klaus Scholder’s The Birth of Modern
Critical Theology, trans. John Bowden (Philadelphia: Trinity Press, 1996), Hans Frei’s The
Eclipse of Biblical Narrative (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1974) and Ernst
Troeltsch’s essay ‘Historical and Dogmatic Method in Theology’ in Religion in History, trans.
James A. Luther and Walter Bense (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1991) are very useful
introductions to the Historical Critical Method. For more on European Orientalism and the
study of Islam, see Ahmad Gunny, The Prophet Muhammad in English and French Literature
1650 to the Present (Islamic Foundation, 2010); Avril Powell, Scottish Orientalists and

 India: The Muir Brothers, Religion, Education and Empire (Boydell, 2010); and Suzanne
Marchand, German Orientalism in the Age of Empire (Cambridge University Press, 2009).
ENDNOTES
   1   Expanding on Marshall Hodgson, The Venture of Islam, vol. 1, p. 40.
   2   Joseph Massad, Islam in Liberalism, pp. 65–73. See http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/7264903.stm.;
http://blogs.reuters.com/faithworld/2008/03/07/turkey- explains-revision-of-hadith-project/ (last cited July 2016).
   3   Al-‘Ajlūnī, Kashf al-khafā, vol. 1, p. 12; al-Makkī, Qūt al-qulūb, vol. 1, p. 177.
   4   Lord Acton, A Lecture on the Study of History, pp. 40–42.
   5   Leopold von Ranke, Sämtliche Werke (1868–90), vol. 33, pp. v–viii.
   6   For example, twelfth-century paintings of Gospel scenes in the Swiss church of Zillis show characters dressed in medieval
clothes; Rosalind and Christopher Brooke, Popular Religion in the Middle Ages, p. 137; Myron P. Gilmore, Humanists
and Jurists, pp. 1–10.
   7   Cicero, The Nature of the Gods, pp. I:60–62, 71–73; Petrarch, The Secret, pp. 68–69.
   8   Eugene F. Rice, Jr. and Anthony Grafton, The Foundations of Early Modern Europe, p. 82.
   9  This verse reads: ‘And there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word and the Holy Ghost: and these
three are one …’ King James Bible 1 John 5:7–8. Only four Greek manuscripts mentioned this famous ‘Johannan comma,’
and all were historically late; Jerry Bentley, Humanists and Holy Writ, pp. 45, 152–153.
  10   Klaus Scholder, The Birth of Modern Critical Theology, p. 67; Travis Frampton, Spinoza and the Rise of Historical
Criticism of the Bible, pp. 208–216.
  11  Peter Gay, ed., Deism, pp. 72–77.
  12  Hans Frei, The Eclipse of Biblical Narrative, pp. 25–26.
  13  Scholder, Birth of Modern Critical Theology, pp. 37–40.
  14  Benedict Spinoza, Theological-Political Treatise, pp. 170–171.
  15  See for a version of this, al-Khatīb al-Baghdādī, Tārīkh Baghdād, vol. 6, p. 115.
  16  F. A. Wolf, Prolegomena to Homer, p. 233.
  17  Voltaire, Essai sur les Moeurs, p. 1:288.
  18  Frei, Eclipse of Biblical Narrative, pp. 56–57, 162; Robert Morgan and John Barton, Biblical Interpretation, p. 48. See
also Pico’s (d. 1494) Oration on the Dignity of Man.
  19  Robert Morgan and John Barton, Biblical Interpretation, p. 47; Thomas Howard, Religion and the Rise of Historicism,
p. 34.
  20  Howard, Religion and the Rise of Historicism, pp. 2, 12–13.
  21  Voltaire, Essai sur les moeurs, p. 1:288.
  22  Mullā ‘Alī al-Qārī, al-Asrār al-marfū‘a, p. 407.
  23  Edward Gibbon, The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, vol. 1, p. 186.
  24  Polybius, The Histories, p. I:14.
  25  John Herman Randall, The School of Padua and the Emergence of Modern Science, pp. 18, 46–47.
  26  Livy, The Early History of Rome, p. 3:1.
  27  Herodotus, The Histories, p. II:120.
  28  J. H. Brumfitt, Voltaire, Historian, p. 103.
  29  Ernst Troeltsch, ‘Historical and Dogmatic Method in Theology,’ pp. 13–14; W. Von Leyden, ‘Antiquity and Authority: A
Paradox in the Renaissance Theory of History,’ p. 488.
  30  The scholar al-Kirmānī (d. 786/1384) said that it is an essential belief in Islam that there was no ‘evil (sharr)’ in the time of
the Prophet; Ibn Hajar, Fath, vol. 13, p. 26.
  31  Bart D. Ehrman, The New Testament, pp. 204–205; Arnaldo Momigliano, Studies in Historiography, p. 21.
  32  Norman Perrin, What Is Redaction Criticism?, p. 16.
  33  Voltaire, La Philosophie de l’Histoire, p. 121.
  34  Suzanne Marchand, German Orientalism in the Age of Empire, pp. 157, 174, 183–184, 187; Nöldeke’s Geschichte des
Qorans has been translated as The History of the Qur’ān, trans. Wolfgang Behn (Leiden, Brill, 2013).
  35  William Muir, The Life of Mohamet, p. xxxvii.
  36  Ibid., pp. lxviii, lxxi.
  37  Ibid., p. xlii.
  38  Ignaz Goldziher, Muslim Studies II, pp. 19–22. Goldziher’s German original, Mohammedanische Studien, was published

 in 1889–1890.
  39  Goldziher, Introduction to Islamic Theology and Law, p. 40.
  40  Goldziher, Muslim Studies II, pp. 22–23.
  41  Ibid., p. 143.
  42  Ibid., p. 40.
  43  Ibid., pp. 44–45.
  44  Ibid., p. 52.
  45  Ibid., p. 44–47; Lecker, ‘Biographical Notes on Ibn Shihāb al-Zuhrī.’
  46  Goldziher, Muslim Studies, p. 75.
  47  Ibid., pp. 38–40.
  48  Ibid., p. 77.
  49  Ibid., pp. 79–85.
  50  Ibid., p. 99.
  51  Ibid., p. 121.
  52  Ibid., pp. 95–97; Sunan Abī Dāwūd: kitāb al-fitan, bāb al-nahy ‘an al-sa‘ī fī al-fitna.
  53  Goldziher, Muslim Studies, p. 122.
  54  Ibid., p. 108.
  55  Ibid., pp. 113–114.
  56  Ibid., pp. 123–124.
  57  Ibid., p. 52.
  58  Ibid. pp. 74–75.
  59  Ibid., p. 18.
  60  Ibid., pp. 55–56. Al-Bayhaqī and Ibn Khuzayma know of no one ‘from the east to the west’ who corroborates this report.
A similar report, also considered unreliable, is in the Musnad of Ibn Hanbal, vol. 2, p. 367. See al-Suyūtī, Miftāh al-janna
fī al-ihtijāj bi’l-sunna (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, 1987), p. 39; Ibn Qudāma, al-Muntakhab min al-‘Ilal li’l-
Khallāl (Riyadh: Dār al-Rāya, 1998), p. 145.
  61  Ibid., pp. 140–141.
  62  Schacht, ‘A Revaluation of Islamic Tradition,’ pp. 146–147.
  63  Ibid., p. 151.
  64  Ibid., p. 149.
  65  Ibid., p. 151.
  66  Schacht, The Origins of Muhammadan Jurisprudence, p. 13.
  67  Ibid., p. 22.
  68  Ibid., p. 4.
  69  Ibid., pp. 165–166.
  70  Schacht, ‘A Revaluation,’ p. 151.
  71  Schacht, Origins of Muhammadan Jurisprudence, p. 157.
  72  Ibid., p. 157.
  73  Ibid., pp. 4–5.
  74  See Schacht, Origins, pp. 39, 165; idem, ‘A Revaluation of Islamic Tradition,’ p. 147.
  75  Schacht, Origins, p. 175.
  76  Ibid., p. 166.
  77  Ibid., p. 156.
  78  Juynboll, Muslim Tradition: Studies in Chronology, Provenance and Authorship of Early H.adīth, p. 71.
  79  Juynboll, ‘Some isnād-analytical methods illustrated on the basis of several women-demeaning sayings from H.adīth
literature,’ in Studies on the Origins and Uses of Islamic H.adīth, p. 352.
  80  Ibid., p. 353.
  81  Ibid., p. 353.
  82  Juynboll, Muslim Tradition, p. 98.
  83  Juynboll, ‘Some Isnād-analytical methods,’ p. 368.
  84  Juynboll, ‘Nāfi‘, the mawlā of Ibn ‘Umar, and his position in Muslim H.adīth literature,’ in Studies on the Origins and
Uses of Islamic H.adīth, p. 215.
  85  Juynboll, ‘(Re)Appraisal of some Hadith Technical Terms,’ p. 318.
  86  Juynboll, Muslim Tradition, pp. 52, 73, 75.
  87  Ibid., pp. 5, 10.

   88  Ibid., pp. 72–74.
  89  Ibid., p. 30.
  90  Juynboll, ‘Nāfi‘, the mawlā of Ibn ‘Umar,’ pp. 219, 238–239.
  91  Juynboll, Muslim Tradition, p. 98.
  92  Christian Troll, Sayyid Ahmad Khan: A Reinterpretation of Muslim Theology, pp. 132–134.
  93  Abbott, Studies in Arabic Literary Papyri II: Qur’ānic Commentary and Tradition, pp. 31–32.
  94  Ibid., p. 29.
  95  Ibid., pp. 21–22, 49–51.
  96  Ibid., p. 71.
  97  Ibid., pp. 66, 71–72.
  98  Ibid., p. 74.
  99  Ibid., p. 77.
100  Muhammad Azami, Studies in Early H.adīth Literature, p. 14.
101  Ibid., p. xvi.
102  Ibid., p. 218.
103  Ibid., p. 239.
104  Ibid.; for examples, see pp. 239–242.
105  Ibid., pp. 219–221.
106  Ibid., pp. 19, 246.
107  Patricia Crone, Roman, Provincial and Islamic Law, p. 33.
108  Ibid., p. 31.
109  Ibid., pp. 32–33.
110  Ibid., p. 33.
111  Crone, Meccan Trade and the Rise of Islam, pp. 109–110; 203–231; John Burton, An Introduction to the Hadith, p. 181.
112  Michael Cook, Early Muslim Dogma: a Source-Critical Approach, pp. 107–108.
113  Cook, Early Muslim Dogma, pp. 100, 110; idem, ‘Eschatology and the Dating of Traditions,’ pp. 23–47.
114  Fred Donner, ‘From Believers to Muslims: Confessional Self-identity in the Early Islamic Community,’ pp. 9–53; idem,
Muhammad and the Believers.
115  Donner, Narratives of Islamic Origins, p. 27.
116  Motzki, ‘Dating Muslim Traditions: a Survey,’ p. 235.
117  David S. Powers, ‘On Bequests in Early Islam,’ pp. 199–200.
118  Ibid., p. 195.
119  See Motzki, ‘Quo vadis, Ḥ adīt-Forschung?,’ pp. 40–80. This has been translated as ‘Whither Hadīth Studies?,’ in Harald
Motzki et al., Analysing Muslim Traditions: Studies in Legal, Exegetical and Maghāzī Íadīth (Leiden: Brill, 2010).
120  Motzki, ‘The Murder of Ibn Abī H.uqayq,’ pp. 231–232.
121 Ibid., p. 174.
122  Ibid., p. 182.
123  Ibid., p. 184.
124  Ibid., p. 187.
125  Motzki, ‘The Mus.annaf of ‘Abd al-Razzāq al-S.an‘ānī as a Source of Authentic Ah.ādīth of the First Century A.H,’ pp.
8–9.
126  Ibid., pp. 4, 11.
127  Ibid., p. 11.
128  Ibid., p. 12.
129  See Motzki, ‘Der Fiqh des Zuhrī: die Quellenproblematik.’
130  Al-Jawzaqānī, Al-Abātīl, pp. 114–115; al-Dhahabī, Mīzān, p. 3:277; Ibn ‘Adī, Al-Kāmil, vol. 5, pp. 1744, 1751, 1756.
131  See the Caliph ‘Umar b. ‘Abd al-Azīz’s (d. 101/720) letter on the subject, where he refers to them as those who hold ‘al-
qawl bi’l-qadar’; Abū Nu‘aym, Hilyat al-awliyā’, vol. 5, p. 351. Compare with Mālik b. Anas referring to them as the
qadariyya in his Muwatta’: kitāb al-qadar, bāb al-nahy ‘an al-qawl bi’l-qadar. The earliest appearance of the
Qadarite hadiths is Dirār b. ‘Amr (d. 200/815), Kitāb al-Tahrīsh, p. 99.
132  For the corresponding versions of these hadiths, see Sunan Ibn Mājah: introduction, bāb fī al-qadar; Musnad Ibn
Hanbal, vol. 2, p. 125, etc.
133  Lecker, ‘Biographical Notes on al-Zuhri,’ p. 38.
134  Al-Humaydī, Al-Musnad, vol. 2, p. 330.
135  Al-Suyūtī, Al-Jāmi‘ al-saghīr, # 648.

 136  A True Narrative of the Examination, Tryall, and Sufferings of James Nayler [London], n.p. 1657., p. 4–5.
137  Juynboll, Muslim Tradition, pp. 52, 73, 75.
138  Khatīb, Al-Kifāya, p. 2:371–378; idem, Al-Jāmi‘, vol. 2, p. 312.

 10
DEBATES OVER PROPHETIC TRADITIONS IN THE MODERN MUSLIM
WORLD
INTRODUCTION: SETTING THE STAGE FOR MODERNITY AND ISLAM
In the eighteenth century, a network of interrelated economic, technological, social, and
political changes began sweeping the world, beginning in England and Western Europe.
Collectively known by scholars as Modernity, these forces ushered in a new phase of human
history and raised inexorable questions about the nature of religion and its place in life. The
challenges of Modernity have proven especially daunting for those peoples among whom it had
not developed gradually before it was imposed through European colonization.
Perhaps nowhere has it been felt more sharply than among Muslims. Since their confrontation
with the Modern West, Muslims have faced one daunting question: if Islam is God’s true
religion, and Muslims God’s chosen community, why are they so powerless and subordinate
before the Modern West? In attempts to answer and redress this question, Muslim discourse in
the modern period has found discussing the role of hadiths in Islam unavoidable.
The stage for modern Muslim thought was set by two main forces: Western colonialism and
indigenous Islamic movements of revival and reform. European arms quickly proved vastly
superior to Muslim armies. The British East India Company had become the de facto
government of several provinces of the Muslim Mughal Empire in India by 1764. In 1798
Napoleon occupied Egypt, and in 1882 the country was brought under British control.
More alarming for Muslim scholars, however, was the seeming superiority of European
ideas to Islamic tradition. European scientists bent to their will technologies undreamt of in
Muslim lands, and European society functioned with undeniably impressive organization. The
rationalism and historicism of the European Enlightenment accompanied colonial
administrations, and European Orientalists soon began turning their critical gaze on the Islamic
religious trad-ition. Some Muslims immediately mistrusted Orientalism and sought to rebut it.
Others were convinced by elements of European thought and swayed by Western scholars of
Islam. Many Muslims were confused over what elements of Modernity they should embrace
and what this entailed for their faith. Whether accepted or rejected, however, European thought
and the civilization it represented became a central player in modern Islamic thought.
Interestingly, even before the impact of Modernity, Islamic civilization was shaken by
entirely internal forces. In the mid 1700s, previously marginal parts of the Muslim world, such
as West Africa, central Arabia, and India, brought forth unprecedented movements of Islamic
revival and reform that would exercise tremendous influence on the whole Muslim world.
These movements were driven by a sense that the Muslim community had lost its moorings in
the legacy of the Prophet. It had been led astray by heretical accretions in theology and
worship as well as by chauvinistic loyalty to the schools of law.
Although they did not abandon the classical Islamic tradition, these movements sought to

 revaluate it and revive Islam’s primordial greatness by breaking with taqlīd (unquestioning
loyalty to existing institutions and tradition) and embracing ijtihād (independent reasoning
based on the original sources of Islam – the Quran and Sunna). Many of these revivalist
scholars believed that they were just as capable as classical masters like al-Shāfi‘ī and Abū
Hanīfa of deriving laws directly from the Quran and the Prophet’s teachings. As the great
revivalist scholar Ibn al-Amīr al-San‘ānī (d. 1768) wrote, ‘that gift of your Lord has not been
made off-bounds, and the virtues that He has bestowed are not limited to those who have come
before us.’1
Some of these movements were primarily scholarly, such as the reformist trend instigated in
Yemen by al-San‘ānī and in India by Shāh Walī Allāh (d. 1762). Others added a strong
dimension of reforming Muslim society through force of arms, such as Osman dan Fodio’s (d.
1817) expansionist Sokoto Caliphate in modern-day Nigeria or Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhāb’s (d.
1792) militaristic Muwahhid movement (better known as Wahhābism) in central Arabia.
This common mission of bypassing the rigid institutions of the Late Sunni Tradition to revive
the pure Islam of the Prophet’s time and purge it of later cultural or intellectual impurities
pushed the hadith tradition to the forefront. What better way to return to the source of Islam’s
original greatness than by renewing the study of the Sunna? Praising the Sunni devotees of
hadith (ahl al-hadīth) in the early Islamic period, al-San‘ānī recites:
 
They quenched their thirst by drawing from the sea of Muhammad’s knowledge,
They did not have those schools of law for watering holes.2
 
Many revivalist scholars not only demonstrated a rejuvenated interest in hadith studies, they
also believed that they were just as qualified as the great Sunni hadith critics of the classical
period to rule on the authenticity of hadiths.
One of the interesting byproducts of the eighteenth-century movements of revival and reform
was the shift of hadith studies from its medieval locus in Iran, Egypt, and Syria to the dynamic
reformist regions of the Hejaz, Yemen, India, and eventually Morocco. Since the 1700s it has
been Hejazi scholars like Muhammad Hayāt al-Sindī (d. 1750), Yemenis like Muhammad al-
Shawkānī (d. 1834), Indians like Shāh Walī Allāh and ‘Abd al-Hayy al-Laknawī (d. 1886–7),
and Moroccans like Muhammad b. Ja‘far al-Kattānī (d. 1927) who have pioneered new
creative ground in hadith studies.
Precisely why these similar but often unconnected movements arose at this time in distant
corners of the Muslim world remains a mystery. Perhaps the Late Sunni Tradition, with its
strict loyalty to schools of law, elaborate speculative theology, and Sufi brotherhoods had
simply become too entrenched for Islam’s inherent antipathy towards institutions of religious
authority. When one considers that some late Sunni scholars like the Egyptian al-Sāwī (d.
1825) had asserted that anyone who did not follow one of the four Sunni schools of law was
misguided, potentially an unbeliever, even if they followed clear indications from the Quran or
Sunna, it seems easy to understand why some Muslims might conclude that reform was
necessary.3

 THE MODERN DEBATE OVER HADITHS: FOUR MAIN APPROACHES
In light of these forces, a thoughtful Muslim living in early twentieth-century Cairo, Istanbul, or
Delhi might have pondered the following questions: Islam is clearly in a state of decline,
whether in comparison to modern Europe or in relation to its own original greatness. But is
this due to some inherent failing in the Islamic intellectual trad-ition or because Muslims have
lost touch with Islam’s true nature? If one seeks to recover Islam’s true nature, does one take
Modernity into account or ignore it completely? Ultimately, in the attempt to understand how to
live as Muslims in the modern world, what components of Muslims’ historical heritage (in
Arabic, turāth) should they embrace, abandon, or alter, and how does one justify these choices
in a way that is authentically ‘Islamic’?
The hadith tradition in particular posed two major questions. In light of European historical
criticism on the one hand and a revived commitment to the Prophet’s authentic legacy on the
other, 1) had the hadith tradition and its classical method of hadith evaluation produced a
reliable representation of Muhammad’s Sunna? and 2) what should be the overall place of
hadiths and the Sunna in understanding Islam?
We can identify four broad approaches taken by Muslims to answering these questions:
Islamic Modernism, Modernist Salafism, Traditionalist Salafism and Late Sunni
Traditionalism. Although this four-fold division is useful, it is not watertight. Some thinkers
sway between schools or change their positions depending on context. Also, some of these
names are nomenclatures that I have chosen and have not actually been used by their adherents.
Nonetheless, this division is helpful for understanding the complexity of Islamic thought in the
modern period. Not surprisingly, Islamic responses to Modernity arose earliest in those areas
earliest exposed to Europe, particularly India, Egypt, and Ottoman Istanbul.
ONE: ISLAMIC MODERNISTS AND THE ‘QURAN ONLY’ MOVEMENT
Beginning in the second half of the nineteenth century, some Muslim scholars began challenging
core components of the pre-modern Islamic tradition. Some concluded that the hadith tradition
was not at all a reliable representation of Muhammad’s message. A few of these thinkers went
so far as to reject altogether the authoritativeness of the Prophet’s precedent. We can label this
overall trend as Islamic Modernism, which is characterized by a radical reconsideration of
classical Islamic beliefs.
An early, well-known Modernist was Chirāgh ‘Alī (d. 1895), an Indian who worked in the
civil service of the local ruler of Hyderabad. ‘Alī was a close associate of the pivotal Islamic
thinker of South Asia in the modern period, Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan (d. 1898), whom we will
discuss shortly. ‘Alī rejected all sources of Islamic law and dogma except the Quran, and
called for a reinterpretation of Islamic law based on the ideals of humanism (such as
rationalism, science, and non-religiously based ethics). Limiting the sources of Islamic law to
the Quran was not a hindrance to the Shariah, he argued, since the Prophet had expected his
community to revise their law occasionally in accordance with the needs of the times.
Influenced by the revivalist movement of Shāh Walī Allāh, he embraced ijtihād. Ijmā‘
(consensus), he felt, had never been an acceptable source of law, since ‘Alī argued that even

 Ibn Hanbal had been skeptical about the validity of claims of ijmā‘ (Ibn Hanbal is often quoted
as denying any actual occurrence of ijmā‘).4
‘Alī accepted the criticism of hadiths published by Orientalists like Muir and Goldziher (see
Chapter 9) and felt that the hadith corpus was unreliable. Interestingly, it was ‘Alī’s desire to
defend Islam against Orientalists that led him to this stance. He was disturbed by Christian
missionaries and European polemicists claiming that Islam was fossilized and replete with
irrational beliefs, such as those found in hadiths.5 Abandoning hadiths was necessary for saving
the rest of Islam’s message. Without the hadith corpus, ‘Alī could offer unprecedented
alternatives to beliefs that a modern mindset might consider backward. The jinn, a group of
beings that the Quran mentions ambiguously as being composed of fire but that hadiths
characterize as beings who inhabit earth in tandem with humans, he argued were actually
another Semitic tribe.6
‘Alī’s thought was continued by what became known as the Ahl-e Qur’ān (The People of the
Quran) movement in India. The Ahl-e Qur’ān saw hadiths as an embarrassing travesty in Islam
and argued that Islamic dogma and law should be derived from the Quran alone. The movement
was started by ‘Abdallāh Chakrālawī (d. 1930) and Khwāja Ahmad Dīn Amritsari (d. 1936)
between 1906 and 1917 and produced several journals devoted to elaborating its ideas.
Amritsari had been a student at a missionary school, and his readings in hadiths led him to
conclude that many hadiths were shockingly foul and patently false. He wrote a book on the
Quran in which, among other things, he tried to demonstrate how Islamic inheritance law could
be derived from the Quran without any reference to hadiths.7
The next generation of the Ahl-e Qur’ān was led by Muhammad Aslam Jayrapūrī (d. 1955),
who mocked the traditional science of isnād criticism as senseless ‘narration worship (rivāyat
parastī).’ Since whole isnāds were forged, he argued, it was impossible to distinguish truth
from falsehood using isnād criticism.8 His colleague, Mistrī Muhammad Ramadān (d. 1940)
abandoned the idea of trying to extrapolate the labyrinthine details of Islamic law from the
Quran. The holy book readily provided all the legal information Muslims needed, he argued,
and anything omitted or left ambiguous was intentional – God had left humans free to use their
reason in order to adapt to new times.9 In recent decades, the ‘Quran only’ movement has
flourished amongst the middle class and elite in Pakistan, particularly through the writings of
Ghulam Ahmad Parwez (d. 1985) and his Tulu-e Islam (Islamic Dawn) foundation.
Although the ‘Quran only’ movement flourished in India and Pakistan, it flared only briefly in
the Arab world. In a 1906 issue of the famous Islamic reformist journal al-Manār (The
Lighthouse), the Egyptian physician Muhammad Tawfīq Sidqī (d. 1920) wrote an article
entitled ‘Islam is the Quran Alone (al-Islām huwa al-Qur’ān wahdahu)’ in which he argued
that Islam was never meant to be understood from anything other than the Quran. One key proof
for this was that the Prophet did not explicitly order the recording of his Sunna, and indeed
hadiths were not set down in any lasting or reliable form for over a century after Muhammad’s
death. How, Sidqī asked, could God ever allow His religion to depend on such a dubious
source?10 What has been understood as the ‘Sunna’ – the detailed precedent of the Prophet –
was intended only to be binding on the first generation of Muslims; ‘the Prophet gave the Sunna

 to the Arabs.’11 After the Companions, Muslims were expected to adapt their law to
circumstance according to the principles laid out in the Quran.12 Like his Indian Ahl-e Qur’ān
counterparts, Sidqī attempted to demonstrate how the details of Muslim prayer could be
inferred from the Quran without hadiths.
Hadiths were patently unreliable in Sidqī’s opinion, with the possible exception of those
very few that could be considered mutawātir.13 Hadith criticism had begun too late to catch
many of the forged hadiths, and as a result many reports attributed to the Prophet were actually
isrā’īliyyāt, or stories from Jewish lore.14 As a doctor, Sidqī devoted special attention to
hadiths that he considered incompatible with the realities of modern medicine. He notes the
controversial ‘Hadith of the Fly’ (found in Sahīh al-Bukhārī and other collections) in which
the Prophet states that if a fly has landed in one’s drink one should submerge it totally ‘because
on one wing is disease and on the other is the cure.’15 This was not only medically unsound,
argued Sidqī, but it contradicted another command from the Prophet that if a mouse fell in
liquid butter it should all be poured out.16 Sidqī’s writings caused such a furore in al-Manār
and other publications that he quickly recanted his ideas, and they died out in the Arab world.17
Although they have not announced ‘Quran only’ positions as explicitly as Sidqī and the Indian
Ahl-e Qur’ān, many Islamic Modernists have effectively adopted this stance. The influential
modern Arab biography, ‘The Life of Muhammad (Hayāt Muhammad),’ by the Egyptian
intellectual Muhammad Husayn Haykal (d. 1956) was based on the Quran with reference to
only one hadith: the famous Mu‘tazilite hadith urging Muslims to reject any hadith that
contradicts the Quran!18 Haykal defended his ‘Quran only’ biography by saying he was using
‘new critical methods’ that were not allowed during classical times and writing his book ‘in
the modern scholarly manner.’ Haykal echoed Orientalist criticisms that many hadiths were
forged during the early period of sectarian and political strife and that many were fabricated
merely to glorify Muhammad’s miraculous powers. He therefore rejected any miracles
attributed to the Prophet. Moreover, classical Muslim critics like al-Bukhārī and Ibn Hajar did
not even agree on what was reliable or not.19
By far the most influential Modernist critique of the Sunni hadith tradition came from the
Egyptian Mahmūd Abū Rayya (d. 1970). A disciple of the leading Syrian reformist Rashīd
Ridā (see below), Abū Rayya wrote a scathing work entitled ‘Lights on the Muhammadan
Sunna (Adwā’ ‘alā al-sunna al-muhammadiyya)’ (1958) in which he argued that only the
Quran, reason, and unquestionably reliable mutawātir accounts of the Prophet’s legacy were
originally meant to be the basis of Islam. ‘As for applying the term “Sunna” to what is
subsumed by the hadith corpus [in general], that is a later convention.’20 Neither the Prophet
nor his Companions had seen fit to record his every word, and the early jurists of Islam had
followed in their footsteps by acting on the legal principles of the Sunna as opposed to random
hadiths. Nothing in Islam required Muslims to read or believe the contents of hadith
collections.21
Like earlier Modernists, Abū Rayya explained that early hadith critics had not paid attention
to the contents of hadiths, and that outrageous reports such as ‘The Devil flees, farting, when he
hears the call to prayer’ had been declared sahīh.22 He also echoes the criticism about the long

 delay between the Prophet’s death and the definitive recording of hadiths – a period in which
myriad sectarian and political groups forged countless hadiths. The permissibility of ‘narration
of hadiths by general meaning (riwāya bi’l-ma‘nā)’ also led to the mutation and
misunderstanding of many reports.
Notions that all the Companions were upstanding were patently absurd, Abū Rayya argued,
since the Companions violently disagreed with one another. Although Abū Rayya built directly
on the work of Ridā, his criticism of the Companions took him outside the fold of what his
teacher and mainstream Sunni Islam could tolerate. Abū Rayya rejected exempting the
Companions from hadith criticism, saying that ‘people are people in every era, and humans
have natures, appetites and agendas that do not change.’23 This attitude closely resembles the
Principle of Analogy used by Western scholars, and it is no coincidence that Abū Rayya
referred his readers to the works of Goldziher and other Orientalists.24
Abū Rayya’s most noteworthy contribution to Modernist criticisms of hadith was his
multifaceted attack on the reliability of Abū Hurayra, the single most prolific transmitter of
hadiths from among the Companions. Using reports from both Sunni and Shiite books of
transmitter criticism, Abū Rayya produces evidence characterizing Abū Hurayra as a
gluttonous and dishonest opportunist.25 Noting how he joined the Muslim community only three
years before the Prophet’s death, Abū Rayya asks how Abū Hurayra could ever have heard the
thousands of hadiths he claimed to transmit. Citing an early Hanafī criticism of Abū Hurayra,
he argued that he was not learned in issues of ritual and law and therefore frequently mangled
the meanings of hadiths he reported.26 He added that Abū Hurayra was well known to be
obsessed with isrā’īliyyāt, tales from Jewish lore about earlier prophets, and that he had no
compunction about attributing such tales to the Prophet. Such reports included the unacceptably
anthropomorphic hadith that ‘God created Adam in His image’ and the dogmatically offensive
report (both found in Sahīh Muslim) that Moses knocked out the eye of the angel of death when
he came to take his soul.27 Abū Rayya even considers the hadith urging Muslims to visit the Al-
Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem to be one of the forged isrā’īliyyāt.28
Isrā’īliyyāt proved constantly irksome to Modernists, and Abū Rayya wrote a separate 1946
article entitled ‘Ka‘b al-Ahbār: the First Zionist’ on the early hadith transmitter and Muslim
convert from Judaism, Ka‘b al-Ahbār (d. c. 32/653).29 Hadiths about the Messianic mahdī
figure, Abū Rayya asserts, were similarly imported from Christian lore and falsely attributed
to Muhammad by figures like the Companion Tamīm al-Dārī, who was a convert from
Christianity.30
Abū Rayya’s book proved extremely influential in the hadith debate, in part because of the
author’s broad erudition and in part because the book’s style is less direct and caustic – and
thus perhaps more convincing – than other Modernist works. It quickly prompted at least eight
indignant book-length rebuttals from traditional Muslim scholars, the most famous of which
was the Syrian Mustafā al-Sibā’ī’s (d. 1964) al-Sunna wa makānatuhā fī al-tashrī‘al-islāmī
(The Sunna and its Place in Islamic Lawmaking) (1961).31
These rebuttals generally used orthodox Sunni arguments to respond to the criticisms of Abū
Rayya as well as to those of Western scholars. Al-Sibā’ī, for example, deemphasizes the late

 writing down of hadiths by emphasizing the extraordinary memory of the early Arabs. Abū
Hurayra’s ability to transmit so many hadiths despite his relatively short exposure to the
Prophet was due to his tremendous devotion to the Prophet’s legacy, not any unscrupulousness.
Finally, books of forged hadiths (mawdū‘āt) showed that hadith critics did engage in content
criticism (at least after the 1300s). Other defenses against ‘Quran only’ arguments relied solely
on faith. The Pakistani Islamic political activist Abū al-‘Alā’ Mawdūdī (d. 1979) contended
that the Sunna was intact because ‘The God who preserved his last book also arranged for the
preservation of the example and guidance of his last Prophet.’32
Islamic Modernism and its ‘Quran only’ trend have thrived among Western Muslim scholars.
Although they have not always upheld explicit ‘Quran only’ positions, many have ignored
hadiths in their discussions of Islamic law and dogma, as is the case with the American Amina
Wudud’s revaluation of the traditional Islamic view of gender, and Scott Siraj al-Haqq Kugle’s
argument for the permissibility of homosexual relationships in Islam.33 The ‘Quran only’
movement has continued in Turkey, where the activist intellectual Edip Yuksel and his
colleagues have published the Reformist Quran, an English translation and explanation of the
holy book written without consulting hadiths.34
We should also note a Modernist who has proven extremely adept at navigating the tradition
of Islamic hadith criticism in order to argue for radical reform. In her work Women and Islam,
the French- educated Moroccan social scientist Fatema Mernissi (d. 2015) states her intent to
‘disinter’ the original message of Islam ‘from the centuries of oblivion that have managed to
obscure it.’35 Her heroine is the Prophet’s wife, Aisha, whose criticisms of other Companions’
narrations from the Prophet Mernissi sees as epitomizing the critical spirit of Islam as well as
the religion’s original message of female empowerment. Mernissi argues that, with the
exception of a minority of hadith critics, Muslim scholarship functioned as a tool of the social
and political elite, indulging ‘the desire of male politicians to manipulate the sacred.’36
In order to prove this, she examines two Companions known for transmitting hadiths that
Mernissi considers misogynist and unbefitting her beloved Prophet: Abū Hurayra and Abū
Bakra (not to be mistaken for Abū Bakr, the first caliph). The former transmitted sahīh hadiths
such as the one that women, donkeys, and black dogs break a person’s prayer if they pass in
front of them, and the second narrated the hadith that ‘The community that entrusts its affairs
to a woman will not flourish’ (the first is found in Sahīh Muslim, the second in Sahīh al-
Bukhārī).37 Effectively engaging in historical psychoanalysis, Mernissi uses data from books of
transmitter criticism to argue that Abū Hurayra harbored a deep personal resentment towards
women and that Abū Bakra produced his hadith to secure his place with the caliph ‘Alī after he
had defeated Aisha at the Battle of the Camel in 656 CE.38
In a brilliant turn, Mernissi shows how Abū Bakra should be excluded as a hadith transmitter
according to the Muslim hadith critics’ own critical standards. Mālik is reported to have said
that he would not accept hadiths from someone known to have lied about any matter, and Abū
Bakra was once flogged for untruthfully accusing someone of committing adultery!39 Such
misogynist figures as these transmitters, upon whom the most revered Sunni collections had
relied, lead Mernissi to conclude that ‘even the authentic Hadith must be vigilantly examined

 with a magnifying glass.’40
A unique Modernist vision for the proper treatment of hadiths came from the Pakistani
intellectual and University of Chicago professor Fazlur Rahman (d. 1988). He acknowledged
that the criticisms of Schacht and Goldziher were ‘essentially correct’ and that most hadiths
were not actually spoken by the Prophet.41 Where Orientalists saw deception, however,
Rahman saw the creative implementation of the Islamic message. Though many of the details of
the Sunna were fabricated, the concept of the Sunna was authentic. Muhammad’s Sunna was not
detailed case law, but rather an umbrella of behavioral norms and an interpretive process by
which Muslims could adapt their law to changing circumstances.42 This had been the practice
of the Partisans of Reason (ahl al-ra’y), who had employed the legal reasoning learned from
Muhammad, the original exemplar of Islam, to elaborate law in new situations. This was also
why so many early hadiths were actually ‘forgeries’ – these early jurists had phrased the
conclusions they reached using the interpretive process of the Sunna in the words of
Muhammad. The Sunna was thus ‘very largely the product of the Muslims themselves,’ who
acted organic-ally on the principles inherited from the Prophet through the mental act of ijtihād
in order to form new law. Consensus (ijmā‘) was the acknowledgment of the community that a
newly developed part of the Sunna was authoritative.43
For Rahman, the hadith tradition had been a creative process in which jurists had channeled
the Prophet’s authority to guide their community. Hadiths like those warning about the
deterioration of Muslims’ faith as time went on were designed to steer the community towards
certain laudable goals.44 Yes, the hadiths in al-Bukhārī’s and Muslim’s Sahīhayn that predict
the future were clearly fabricated by Muslims after the death of Muhammad. But they were not
sinister forgeries, and the hadith corpus was not a conspiratorial web of lies, since participants
in the hadith tradition never saw themselves as engaged in a strict process of recording
history.45
Unfortunately, Rahman continues, the formation of the hadith canon and the literal submission
to hadiths introduced by al-Shāfi‘ī turned the dynamic Sunna into a petrified and unchanging set
of rules. Rahman states that hadiths need to be reexamined critically according to historical
criticism in order to determine if they were really part of the original Sunna, ‘whose very life
blood was free and progressive interpretation.’46 Once this is determined, modern Muslims can
pick up with new interpretation where the jurists left off when the Sunna was frozen in the ninth
century. Rahman acknowledges the value of isnād criticism in detecting forgeries. This method,
however, can only tell us if a hadith is forged. It cannot ensure that it is not forged. For that we
must employ modern historical criticism.47
One of the most dynamic Islamic modernist thinkers in South Asia since Rahman has been his
fellow Pakistani Javed Ahmad Ghamidi. Trained as a youth in a Hanafī madrasa, Ghamidi later
studied English literature and Islamic philosophy at university. He then became a disciple of
Amin Ahsan Islahi (d. 1997), one of the most intellectually creative modern Muslim scholars
of the Quran. Ghamidi has carried on and advanced Islahi’s legacy, developing a novel method
for reading the holy book that sees the Shariah as an eternal reality that must be clearly
distinguished from Muslims’ applications of its message in time and context – even its

 application by the Prophet. Certain aspects of Islamic law are thus, Ghamidi argues, meant to
apply only in the Prophet’s time, such as the death penalty for apostasy. Like Khan and other
Islamic modernists (as well as Modernist Salafis, see below), Ghamidi enshrines the Quran as
the primary source of Islamic law and dogma by reviving aspects of the classical Mu‘tazilite
and early Hanafī traditions. The Quran is thus unquestionably epistemologically and
hermeneutically more powerful than the Prophet’s Sunna, which Ghamidi trims down
significantly. For him, the Sunna does not include the Prophet’s optional acts of worship, his
statements about science or nature, and it only pertains to ‘religious,’ not worldly, affairs. For
Ghamidi, the Sunna is also qualitatively distinct from the hadith corpus, which he ranks as
markedly lower in his epistemological and hermeneutic hierarchy. The Sunna can be known
only through a combination of massively transmitted (mutawātir) hadiths and perpetual
practice amongst the Muslim community. It cannot be known by isolated (āhād) hadiths, which
should only be accepted if they concur with the Quran, the Sunna, reason and observed facts.48
TWO: MODERNIST SALAFĪS AND OPPOSING THE WEST
The Salafī movement was the name that many of the adherents of this school of thought derived
from the Salaf, or the pious early generations of Muslims, from whose example these
reformists hoped to reconstitute Islam’s original purity. To a large extent, the eighteenth-century
movements of revival and reform were all Salafī in their approach; for them the early Muslim
community represented their hopes for the future. It was powerful, dynamic, and preceded what
many reformists viewed as the superstitions, blind loyalty to tradition, and the havoc wreaked
on medieval Islam by foreign cultural accretions such as Greek logic and Persian mysticism. In
terms of their thought, by the mid 1800s these Salafī movements had split into two main
branches, which we will call the Modernist and Traditionalist Salafī groups. These two
branches interacted with and affected one another, for both shared a common vision of
recapturing the early Islam of the Salaf. But they proposed different means and had opposing
attitudes towards Modernity.
The Modernist Salafī trend has been the most influential and vigorous of the modern Muslim
schools of thought. Nonetheless, it was essentially a response to Modernity. Its proponents
looked back into history at the pure Arab Islam of the Prophet’s time, but what they re-created
by drawing unsystematically from the rich tradition of Islamic civilization was an Islam
tailored to fit the modern world. Arguably the most influential Modernist Salafī was the Indian
Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan (d. 1898), whose thought ultimately aimed at the twin goals of the
rationalization of Islamic dogma and ‘the liberalization of Islamic law.’49 An employee of both
the British East India Company and the Mughal dynasty, after the Indian rebellion of 1857 Khan
remained fiercely loyal to the British. He believed that only by reconciling with Modernity and
Western rule could Islam survive. In 1868 he adopted a Western lifestyle, and in 1875 he
successfully founded the Anglo-Muhammadan Oriental College at Aligarh in India, the most
successful center of reformist Islamic education (today called Aligarh Muslim University).50
Khan authored numerous books, including a commentary on the Bible and a commentary on
the Quran, and established an influential Urdu-language journal called Tahdhīb al-akhlāq. In

 general, Khan followed Shāh Walī Allāh’s reformist rejection of taqlīd and innovations in
Islamic belief and worship.51 He also infused his works with distinctly modern notions, such as
an acceptance of Darwinian evolution and the position that nothing in the Quran can be
interpreted as contradicting the laws of nature. ‘If the word [of the Quran] is not according to
the work [the law of nature], then the word cannot be the word of God.’52 Of course, he notes,
humans have only begun to understand the laws of nature!53 He also rejected claims of ijmā‘ as
convincing proof in scholarly discourse.54
In the 1860s Khan encountered Muir’s criticisms of hadiths, and he was immediately alarmed
at this unsuspected attack on Islam from its external foes. In 1870 he began a refutation of
Muir’s book, although he also accepted many Orientalist criticisms.55 He acknowledged, for
example, that classical Muslim scholars had not performed proper content criticism of hadiths
(he contends that they had intended this to be done by later scholars) and that the historical lag
in writing down hadiths had resulted in copious forgeries, many concocted to sanctify and
glorify Muhammad. He also noted that the permissibility of ‘narration by general meaning’ had
led to the unintentional alteration of many hadiths.56
Khan struggled with the solution to the hadith problem throughout his life, but he consistently
affirmed that the hadith corpus had to be reexamined according to a new method of content
criticism that he drew partly from the Hanafī school of law and Mu‘tazilism and partly from
Western historical criticism. First of all, hadiths incompatible with modern reason, belittling to
the Prophet, or contradicting the Quran must be rejected.57 He embraced the Hanafī requirement
that all the narrators of a hadith be competent legal scholars. Only mutawātir hadiths were
immune from these critical standards, and these he defined as hadiths that have been accepted
as reliable by Muslim scholars throughout history – only five of which he said exist. He added
that hadiths should be screened to see if they describe miracles that could not be reasonably
believed or historical events that could not have happened.58
Khan’s critical method for hadith evaluation led him to revolutionary breaks with Islamic
tradition. He believed that the Prophet’s Sunna was only pertinent to matters of religion, not
political or civil affairs.59 He concluded that the Prophet’s miraculous night voyage to
Jerusalem was actually done in a dream (both Sunnism and Shiism generally held that he had
been physically transported), and that the Prophet did not perform miracles. Like Chirāgh ‘Alī,
he argued that the Quran’s mentioning jinn did not really mean they existed as supernatural
creatures. They could well be another Semitic tribe.60
Ultimately, defending Islam against infectious Western skepticism was Khan’s real goal.
Although he admitted many Orientalist criticisms of hadiths, he also understood that hadiths
were essential for defending the basic Islamic worldview. When Muir suggested that part of
the Quran might have been lost, Khan relied on hadiths to argue the contrary.61 In proposing that
the Quran be the standard against which the contents of hadiths be judged, Khan was seeking to
find a critical litmus test that both Muslims and Western Orientalists could agree on (since
Orientalists also believed that the Quran was the most historically reliable Islamic
document).62 Khan’s concern for protecting religion from Modernity even led him to defend the
Bible against European critics. Against claims that the global flood of Noah was impossible

 and not borne out in the historical record, Khan countered that the flood had really occurred but
had been restricted to one locale.63
While Khan was writing in India, Egypt witnessed a simultaneous efflorescence of the
Modernist Salafī movement. In fact, the most influential participants in Islamic thought in the
late nineteenth- and twentieth-century Arab world were the Egyptian scholar Muhammad
‘Abduh (d. 1905) and his Syrian student Rashīd Ridā (d. 1935). ‘Abduh was educated at the
renowned al-Azhar University in Cairo but was exiled from Egypt in 1882 for several years
due to involvement in an anti-British rebellion. He traveled to Lebanon and France and
eventually returned to Egypt, where he became chief muftī (jurisconsult) under British rule.
Although ‘Abduh never dealt with the issue of hadiths in a systematic way, he upheld the
orthodox stance that the Sunna is the second major source of law and dogma in Islam.
However, he accepted that the traditional methods of hadith criticism were insufficient and that
the hadith corpus must be reexamined critically.64 In theory, he states, disobeying what is
known to have been the Sunna of the Prophet is anathema. This holds true, however, for ‘a few
only of the traditions.’ In the case of non-mutawātir hadiths, whoever feels comfortable with
them can believe them. But no one can be forced to believe in them or be declared an
unbeliever for rejecting them. No hadith, for example, should be believed if it undermines
God’s total transcendence.65 ‘Abduh was also very skeptical about hadiths predicting the
future, the end of the world or isrā’īliyyāt, and accepted very few such reports as authentic.66
This notion of only requiring Muslims to believe in mutawātir hadiths would be a hallmark of
both Modernism and Modernist Salafism. Decades later it would be elaborated in a formal
religious ruling by the al-Azhar Fatwā Committee.67
‘Abduh’s senior student Rashīd Ridā proved his chief acolyte, and his journal al-Manār was
the main forum for reformist writings. Ridā dealt with hadiths in much more detail than his
teacher. Like ‘Abduh, he argued that the Quran is the basis of Islam and that only mutawātir
hadiths can truly be relied upon. After all, āhād hadiths yielded no more than probable
knowledge, while true certainty came only from mutawātir reports. He equated mutawātir
hadiths with the ‘practical’, living Sunna that all Muslims know, such as prayer, pilgrimage
rituals, and a few of the Prophet’s sayings. The chapters of hadith books that list the obscure
details of the Prophet’s words and actions, such as chapters on manners (adab), all consist of
āhād hadiths and are not necessarily reliable.68 Like Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan, Ridā believed
that the permissibility of narrating the general meaning of hadiths had introduced many errors
into the hadith corpus, since the narrators’ opinions could be integrated accidentally into the
hadith.
Accepting isrā’īliyyāt was another source of misguidance. Even though they had been used in
some of the canonical hadith collections, Ridā dismissed Ka‘b al-Ahbār and another early
transmitter, Wahb b. Munabbih, as unreliable because of their lax transmission of isrā’īliyyāt.
Interestingly, Ridā argued that modern scholars were justified in overturning earlier approval
of these two transmitters because, unlike classical Muslim critics, they could compare
isrā’īliyyāt reports to the actual Jewish scriptures. Ridā thus dismisses Ka‘b and Wahb as
unreliable because their descriptions of the Torah were factually inaccurate (note: as the ninth-

 century scholar al-Jāhiz observed, by ‘Torah’ Ka‘b and other early Muslims meant the Hebrew
scriptures writ large).69 Like other reformists, Ridā called for āhād hadiths to be resubmitted to
content criticism, a process that was originally part of the critical method of Muslim jurists but
had been neglected. At one point, Ridā even states that the content criticism of classical
Muslim scholars was the forerunner of modern historical ‘analytical criticism.’70
Ridā devoted numerous articles in al-Manār to addressing problematic hadiths. He
sometimes declared hadiths that had traditionally been considered authentic to be unreliable
because their contents were unacceptable according to him. Using his in-depth knowledge of
isnād criticism, however, Ridā could attribute this to a problem in the chain of transmission.71
The famous story of God ordering the moon to be split miraculously in half as proof of
Muhammad’s message to his opponents in Mecca had been a required belief in Sunni Islam (it
is mentioned ambiguously in the Quran). Ridā, however, said that the various hadiths
describing this event were so at variance with one another that one could not base one’s faith
on them.72 Another controversial hadith, found in Sahīh al-Bukhārī, that the sun passes under
the earth and prostrates itself before the throne of God when it sets he declared false because it
flatly contradicted modern science.73 The position of only requiring belief in mutawātir hadiths
allowed Ridā ample leeway for some controversial hadiths. The Hadith of the Fly, for
example, could be false or it could be true, since scientists used the flesh of a snake to help
prepare antidotes to its poison.74 Since it was āhād, Muslims are not required to believe in the
hadith either way.
Ridā’s and ‘Abduh’s approach to hadiths won many adherents among Muslim reformists. The
Egyptian Modernist Salafī Mahmūd Shaltūt (d. 1963) was at first persecuted by conservative
ulema for his reformist ideas but was eventually appointed as the head of al-Azhar by the
Egyptian government (which had a reformist agenda). He held that Muslims cannot be declared
unbelievers for rejecting any article of faith that is derived from āhād hadiths.75 Breaking with
an essential tenet of faith in classical Sunni Islam, Shaltūt followed his reasoning to its logical
but controversial conclusion: Muslims could not be repudiated for rejecting the long-held tenet
of Jesus’ return at the end of time or the belief in an Antichrist.76 Furthermore, he argued that
one could not use consensus as proof for these issues of faith because even the consensus of the
Muslim community means nothing on questions known only to God.77
‘Abduh’s and Ridā’s school of thought was continued by Shaltūt’s most famous pupil, the
Azhar scholar Muhammad al-Ghazālī (d. 1996), in his prolific and extremely popular series of
books on reviving Islam in the modern world. Like Shaltūt, al-Ghazālī reminds his readers of
the classical legal theory stance that āhād hadiths are ‘merely probable in their reliability and
merely probable in their indication’ and thus not suitable for essential beliefs.78 Similarly, he
affirms the predominance of the Quran, saying, ‘We believe that the Quran is the basis, and the
Sunna is built on it.’79
Al-Ghazālī’s overriding concern throughout his works is the looming presence of the West.
Although he reiterates his profound respect for classical hadith scholars like al-Bukhārī, he
admits that he will reject a hadith from the canonical collections ‘if it touches upon the most
intimate part of our religion, or opens frightening borders through which our enemies could

 pour.’80 When a student asks him about the sahīh hadith of Moses knocking out the angel of
death’s eye, he replies that its contents show that it is false, since God’s prophet could not try
to avoid his fate. Muslims, however, should worry about more important matters such as ‘the
fact that the enemies of Islam are encircling us.’81
THREE: TRADITIONALIST SALAFĪS AND THE ELEVATION OF HADITHS
What we have termed Traditionalist Salafism emerged directly from the early modern
movements of revival and reform. The most persistent and most politically active
Traditionalist Salafī movement was founded by Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Wahhāb in the mid
eight-eenth century in central Arabia, expanding through its alliance with the Saud family and
eventually becoming the predominant religious movement on the Arabian peninsula. A second
Salafī school appeared in the Yemeni city of Sanaa with the iconoclastic hadith scholars al-
San‘ānī (d. 1768) and al-Shawkānī (d. 1834). A third school developed in Damascus in the
second half of the nineteenth century around revivalist hadith scholars Jamāl al-Dīn al-Qāsimī
(d. 1914) and Tāhir al-Jazā’irī (d. 1920). At this same time an influential Salafī school also
formed in Baghdad through the Hanbalī revival led by the famous Ālūsī family.82 In India, some
of the devotees of Shāh Walī Allāh’s revivalist scholarship formed their own strict
Traditionalist Salafī school, dubbed the Ahl-e Hadīth (The People of Hadith), whose most
famous representative was Siddīq Hasan Khān (d. 1890). Other heirs to Shāh Walī Allāh’s
legacy combined his hadith-based revivalism with India’s longstanding adherence to the
Hanafī school of law. This movement resulted in the founding of the influential school at
Deoband in India.
The most illustrative example of Traditionalist Salafīs is Muhammad Nāsir al-Dīn al-Albānī
(d. 1999), an Albanian whose family immigrated to Syria. Growing up in Damascus, al-Albānī
was deeply affected by Ridā’s al-Manār articles on the extent to which unreliable hadiths had
been used to justify Sufi practices.83 He began to speak out against what he saw as heretical
innovations in every area of Syrian religious life and penned many works attempting to reorient
social and religious practices to the pure Sunna of Muhammad as communicated by hadiths.
Like the other reform movements, Traditionalist Salafīs have aimed at reviving Islam’s
original purity and greatness by clearing away the dross of later cultural accretions. Unlike
Modernist Salafīs, who drew eclectically on Hanafī legal theory, Mu‘tazilism, and modern
rationalism, they have struggled literally to revive the Prophet’s Sunna through a narrow focus
on hadiths. Like their Modernist Salafī counterparts, Traditionalist Salafīs identify the causes
of the Muslim community straying from the Sunna as excessive loyalty to the schools of law
instead of a reverence for their sources, indulgence in speculative theology, and popular Sufi
practices such as visiting the graves of saints.
To cure these ills, Traditionalist Salafīs have not merely engaged in the study of hadiths, they
have tried to cultivate its most critically rigorous spirit. They reject the use of weak hadiths in
any matter, breaking with the practice of the classical Muslim scholars (see Chapter 3). Al-
Albānī asks rhetorically: if we do not dismiss hadiths once we have determined that they are
unreliable, what is the point of the science of hadith criticism?84 Al-Albānī thus published

 numerous books dividing the hadiths contained in classical works such as the Four Sunans of
Abū Dāwūd, al-Nasā’ī, al-Tirmidhī, and Ibn Mājah, the Jāmi‘ al-saghīr of al-Suyūtī, and the
al-Targhīb wa al-tarhīb of al-Mundhirī into sound and unreliable. The Saudi hadith scholar
‘Abdallāh al-Sa‘d rejects the Late Sunni Tradition’s method of bolstering evidence for a
hadith’s authenticity by using other dubious narrations (see Chapter 3).85 The Indian hadith
scholar Shibli Numani (d. 1916), a traditionalist associate of Ahmad Khan, compiled a new
biography of Muhammad that purged it of reports transmitted by early Muslim historians that
hadith critics had considered unreliable.
Like Modernist Salafīs, Traditionalists were willing to cast aside the institutions of classical
Islam, relying on hadiths as the ultimate source for interpreting the faith. The Sunna was
preserved in the authentic hadiths, which are accessible to any Muslim. Like Modernists,
Traditionalist Salafīs have been skeptical of claims of consensus, which served as the primary
defense for employing weak hadiths as evidence and the legitimacy of many Sufi practices.
They do not doubt the theoretical proof value of consensus, but the large number of dissenting
scholarly opinions in Islamic history means that it was actually achieved only rarely.
Unlike Modernists, however, Traditionalist Salafīs avow the same intense trust in hadiths
found among the early ahl al-hadīth. They do not concur with the Modernist reemphasis on the
Quran as the ultimate arbiter in matters of faith and law. Like the early ahl al-hadīth, al-Albānī
asserts that in both law and dogma ‘we cannot distinguish between God and His Prophet.’86 It
is thus perfectly acceptable to derive articles of faith from āhād hadiths, which Muslims must
accept. Did the Prophet not send single individuals as ambassadors to newly converted
communities in order to teach them fundamental Islamic beliefs?87 Although Traditionalist
Salafīs are willing to criticize a hadith for content reasons, like the early ahl al-hadīth they
explain such faults by finding a flaw in the isnād. ‘Abdallāh al-Sa‘d thus declares, ‘It is
impossible for a hadith to have an untrue meaning without there being a flaw in the isnād.’88
Unlike their Modernist and Modernist Salafī counterparts, these Traditionalists do not approve
of Aisha’s criticisms of other Companions for narrating hadiths that seemed to contradict the
Quran. Since these hadiths are well established by multiple sahīh isnāds, such apparent
contradictions only mean that she did not interpret the Prophet’s words correctly.89
Traditionalist Salafīs preserve the spirit of ijtihād. For them, hadith criticism did not end
with the formation of the hadith canon in the classical period. It continues to this day, and
modern scholars can achieve just as high a level of critical mastery as great classical scholars
such as al-Dāraqutnī or Ibn Hajar. Tāhir al-Jazā’irī defends the right of modern scholars to
criticize the meanings of hadiths in the Sahīhayn, rejecting the argument of those who warn that
allowing criticism of the meaning of hadiths will open the door to the ‘people with heretical
agendas.’ He disagrees, saying that proper criticism is a worthy practice.90 When asked about
his controversial criticism of a famous classical hadith transmitter, al-Albānī replied that the
science of hadith criticism ‘is not simply consigned to books,’ it is a dynamic process of
critical review.91 Al-Albānī explained that one of the principles of Islamic scholarship is that
‘religious knowledge cannot fall into rigidity.’92
This spirit of picking up the classical hadith tradition at its most critical point and applying it

 today has led to substantial achievements by Traditionalist Salafī scholars. Al-Albānī
completed two voluminous series, ‘The Series of Weak Hadiths and their Negative Effect on
the Muslim Community’ and ‘The Series of Authentic Hadiths,’ in which he revaluates
thousands of hadiths. Many that he authenticates had previously been declared unreliable, and
many hadiths that he criticizes had earlier won the approval of great classical critics like al-
Bukhārī and Muslim. One of al-Albānī’s students, the Yemeni Muqbil al-Wādi‘ī (d. 2001)
similarly compiled a large work entitled ‘The Compendium of Sahīh Hadiths Not Found in the
Two Sahīhs of al-Bukhārī and Muslim.’
Traditionalist Salafīs have also revived the genre on the technical terminology and rules of
hadith criticism (mustalah al-hadīth). The two most famous modern contributions are Jamāl al
Dīn al-Qāsimī’s Qawā‘id al-tahdīth min funūn mustalah al-hadīth (The Principles of
Regeneration from the Technical Science of Hadith Study) and Tāhir al-Jazā’irī’s Tawjīh al-
nazar ilā usūl al-athar (Examining the Principles of Transmitted Reports). These works are
continuations of the classical mustalah books, such as that of Ibn al-Salāh, but are imbued with
Salafī themes. Tāhir al-Jazā’irī, for example, lambasts the excessive traditionalism of the
Sunni schools of law: ‘The jurists interpret away any hadith that disagrees with their school, or
oppose it with another hadith even if it is not well-known, even if that [first] hadith is found in
the Sahīhayn.’93
Because the Salafī approach to Islamic scholarship centers on bypassing centuries of
consensus-building among scholars and instead approaches the Quran and hadiths anew, it can
produce divergent results. A set of Moroccan brothers who have proven the most adept hadith
scholars of our time, Ahmad b. al-Siddīq al-Ghumārī (d. 1960) and his younger siblings
‘Abdallāh (d. 1993) and ‘Abd al-Hayy (d. 1995), followed the Traditionalist Salafī
methodology. They felt entitled to reverse centuries-old rulings on the authenticity of specific
hadiths and arrived at legal rulings that broke with all four Sunni schools of law. ‘Abd al-Hayy
argued conclusively that none of the founders of the four Sunni schools of law had access to all
the necessary hadiths and that it was thus entirely acceptable to reject their rulings on the basis
of hadith evidence. ‘Abdallāh al-Ghumārī repeatedly wrote that ‘taqlīd never comes to any
good.’94 Ahmad al-Ghumārī concluded that the famous hadith in which the Prophet explained
that the ‘Greatest Jihad’ was ‘the struggle against one’s own soul’ was authentic, while
classical critics had considered it weak or forged.95
Despite this similarity in approach to Traditionalist Salafīs like al-Albānī, the Ghumārī
brothers emerged with polar opposite positions. Salafīs, both Modernist and Traditionalist,
have consistently been deeply opposed to Sufism and intolerant of the Shiite veneration of ‘Alī.
The Ghumārīs’ analysis of the Quran, hadiths, and scholarly tradition, however, has led them to
embrace ‘Alī as the best and most knowledgeable of all the Companions (and in Ahmad’s case,
to declare Mu‘āwiya an unbeliever) as well as to defend vehemently Sufi practices such as
visiting graves and engaging in group liturgies not practiced during the time of the Prophet.96
‘Abdallāh al-Ghumārī repeatedly accused al-Albānī of unmitigated heresy, and at least one
Wahhābī hadith scholar called ‘Abdallāh al-Ghumārī an unbeliever.
Unlike Modernists and Modernist Salafīs, Traditionalist Salafīs have no concern for the

 pressures of Modernity. They believe that if Muslims return to the authentic Sunna of the
Prophet as preserved in the hadith corpus, the Muslim world will once again enjoy God’s
favor regardless of any perceived superiority boasted by the West today. Traditionalist Salafīs
consider the other schools of thought discussed so far in this chapter to be misguided by
Western influence. Al-Albānī thus calls both Abū Rayya and Muhammad al-Ghazālī
‘Occidentalists (mustaghribūn)’ and ‘imitators of the Orientalists.’97
The most furious conflict among schools of Sunni thought in modern times has surged
between the Traditionalist Salafīs and the Late Sunni Traditionalists (see below). Because
Salafīs allow a scholar to break with the established rulings of the Sunni schools of law and
perform ijtihād, Late Sunni Traditionalists accuse this movement of arrogantly claiming to be
the equal of the great scholars of yesteryear. Muhammad Zāhid al-Kawtharī (d. 1952), a high
religious official in the moribund Ottoman Empire, wrote that it was pure error and
misguidance to believe that, today, ‘at the end of time,’ one could correct the great early
scholars of Islam.98 Moreover, adherents of the schools of law accuse Traditionalist Salafīs of
total ignorance of legal theory and thus of ignorantly following random hadiths instead of
understanding how those hadiths fit into the process of deriving law. These factors combine to
create, in the eyes of Late Sunni Traditionalists, interpretive chaos. Muhammad al-Ghazālī, for
example, admits that he dislikes chauvinism towards one particular school of law. But it is
‘less harmful than the childish ijtihād’ of Salafī movements like Wahhābism, which he calls
simplistic ‘Bedouin legal thought.’99 Contrary to such polemical claims, Traditionalist Salafī
scholars do advocate the study of basic books of legal theory (al-Albānī, for example, cites
advanced legal principles such as ‘Evidence that breaks with analogy cannot be used as the
basis for another analogy’).100 However, the Traditionalist Salafīs’ egalitarian argument that
any scholar can break with an established ruling if he feels it has not taken certain hadith
evidence into account has undeniably led to a proliferation of erratic rulings.
FOUR: LATE SUNNI TRADITIONALISTS
All the approaches to understanding Islam in the modern period that we have discussed so far
have advocated the rejection of significant components of Sunni Islam as it existed in the
medieval world through the 1600s. Conversely, what we can call Late Sunni Traditionalism
argues that it is precisely these institutions that are essential for properly living as a Muslim
today. In other words, closely following one of the accepted Sunni schools of law, believing in
the traditional Ash‘arī school of theology, and participating in a Sufi brotherhood provides
modern Muslims with all the legal, spiritual, and theological tools they need to succeed.
Properly understood and correctly combined, these classical institutions allow Muslims to
answer all the challenges of Modernity. Advocates of Late Sunni Traditionalism generally
refer to their school of thought as ‘Traditional Islam’ or ‘Sunnism in its authentic form (ahl al-
sunna ‘alā al-mashrib al-asīl).’ Prominent representatives of this school include Muhammad
Zāhid al-Kawtharī, Muhammad al-Ghazālī,i the late Syrian scholar Muhammad Sa‘īd al-Būtī
(d. 2013) and the former Grand Mufti of Egypt, ‘Alī Jum‘a.
Late Sunni Traditionalism mitigates the stipulations of Islamic law that seem incompatible

 with Modernity by drawing on the collective diversity of the four Sunni legal schools and the
rich intellectual heritage of Sunni legal theory. Although engaging in interest-bearing
commercial transactions is generally prohibited in Islamic law, a minority opinion in the
Hanafī school allows Muslims to take and pay interest if living in a non-Muslim country.101 A
principle of Late Sunni legal theory, ‘Let he who is afflicted with some need take the
permissive ruling,’ permits a Muslim to act on this minority ruling. As Muhammad al-Ghazālī
states, ‘when I am defending Islam … I must move between the opinions of all the imams and
benefit from the full range of understandings.’102 As a result of this methodology, Late Sunni
Traditionalism produces a manfestation of Islam that adapts to many of the stringencies of the
modern world while remaining grounded in ‘authentic’ Islamic tradition.
This school of thought also uses the relationship between law and ethics to circumvent
seemingly harsh elements of Islamic law. Islamic marriage law, for example, seems to clash
with modern sentiments with its legalistic requirements that a woman meet her husband’s
sexual needs and that a husband bear the full financial responsibilities of a family. Late Sunni
Traditionalists, however, argue that the Shariah only addresses people’s strict legal rights, and
that a husband and wife should turn to the Sufi tradition in order to learn how to treat one
another with love and compassion.
Just as Traditionalist Salafīs have resurrected the approach of the ahl al-hadīth, Late Sunni
Traditionalists have revived the methods of the ahl al-ra’y jurists. Late Sunni Traditionalists
subordinate hadiths to the interpretive traditions of the Sunni schools of law and Sunni legal
theory. Late Sunni Traditionalists affirm their total confidence in the classical method of hadith
criticism; as al-Ghazālī says, ‘I do not know its equal in the history of human culture in terms
of establishing principles for verification.’103 They also, however, entrust jurists, not hadith
scholars, with the ultimate authority in determining the authenticity and implication of a hadith.
Al-Kawtharī explains that hadith scholars and jurists had divided up the duties of hadith
criticism, with the latter responsible for content criticism.104 In an analogy similar to the
doctors versus pharmacists comparison mentioned in Chapter 5, al-Ghazālī states:
 
The jurists have been, throughout our intellectual history, the leaders of the Muslim community… and the scholars of
hadiths have been content to provide them with the reports they transmit just as raw building materials are given to the
engineer who builds a structure.105
 
Al-Ghazālī adds that the classical criteria for a sahīh hadith require that it does not include any
hidden flaw (‘illa) or contradict more reliable evidence. Although hadith scholars can criticize
isnāds, it is the jurists who are properly trained to spot such errors in the text of a hadith and
issue the definitive ruling on its reliability. Al-Ghazālī thus declares that a hadith that al-
Albānī authenticatedii saying that ‘In the meat of a cow is disease’ is false because the Quran
notes the blessings of beef. The hadith is thus untrue ‘whatever its isnād may be.’106
Late Sunni Traditionalists also circumvent hadiths that appear to be problematic in the
modern world by relying on the classical juristic concept of communal practice or
interpretation. Just as Mālik had ignored hadiths he acknowledged as authentic because the
Muslim community had never acted on them in law, today’s Late Sunni Traditionalists use the

 collective rulings of Muslim jurists to overrule hadiths. ‘Alī Jum‘a admits that numerous
authentic hadiths exist that command Muslims to kill apostates, such as ‘Whoever changes
their religion [from Islam], kill them.’107 The fact that neither the Prophet nor the early caliphs
actually implemented these rulings when individuals left Islam means that these hadiths
addressed the issue of treason to the Muslim community and not a person’s individual choice
of belief.108 Another influential modern scholar, the Egyptian Yūsuf al-Dijwī (d. 1946),
emphasized how classical Muslim scholarship had always employed reason, scriptural
interpretation and the observation of nature to avoid the literal or superficial understanding of
hadiths so mocked by Modernist critics. In a long-running dispute with Ridā, al-Dijwī argued
that there was no need to reject the hadith of the sun prostrating because pre-modern Muslim
scholars had always interpreted it figuratively and acknowledged that the sun is always shining
on some parts of the earth and not visible elsewhere.109
THE CONTINUITY BETWEEN CLASSICAL AND MODERN DEBATES ON HADITHS
It is worthy of note that debates over hadiths in the modern Muslim world have echoed or
recast debates that occurred in the formative period of Islamic thought. Sidqī and other ‘Quran
only’ advocates rehash the debate between early Muslim rationalists and Sunnis such as al-
Shāfi‘ī in the eighth century. Like al-Shāfi‘ī’s opponents in this debate, Sidqī argued that the
Quran described itself as ‘elucidating everything (tibyān li-kull shay’)’ (Quran 16:89). So
how can one argue that Muslims need hadiths to understand their faith as well? The principal
argument used by conservative Sunnis like al-Sibā’ī against the writings of ‘Quran only’
scholars is drawn directly from al-Shāfi‘ī’s rebuttal of that point: if you reject the Prophet’s
Sunna, how do you know how to pray or fast?110
The raging debate between Traditionalist Salafīs and Late Sunni Traditionalists parallels the
eighth-century dispute between the ahl al-hadīth and the ahl al-ra’y. The principle invoked by
Islamic Modernists and Modernist Salafīs that the hadith corpus should be submitted to content
criticism revives the long-dormant debate between the Mu‘tazilites and the early Sunnis, as
does the specific call to use the Quran as the criterion of judgment. The hadith that Haykal
cited as his evidence for the determinative role of the Quran – ‘There will come to you many
different hadiths from me, so what agrees with the Book of God, accept it, and what
disagrees with it, reject it’ – was used as evidence by early Mu‘tazilites like al-Jāhiz. Sunni
scholars, of course, universally deemed the hadith a forgery. Even the reliability and piety of
Abū Hurayra was a major item of contention between the Mu‘tazilites and the early Sunnis in
the eighth century. In an audience before the Abbasid caliph Hārūn al-Rashīd, the early Sunni
Umar b. Habīb (d. 204/819-20) responded to Mu‘tazilite and ahl al-ra’y arguments that Abū
Hurayra was unreliable by claiming that if one opened the door to criticizing the Companions
of the Prophet, Muslims would lose the whole Shariah.111 Even before modern medicine, the
Hadith of the Fly was raising skeptical eyebrows and prompting Sunni defensiveness as early
as the writings of Ibn Qutayba (d. 276/889).112
Of course, modern Muslim scholars have utilized this classical heritage in unprecedented
ways. Mahmūd Shaltūt used the distinction between the different levels of certainty yielded by

 āhād and mutawātir hadiths – a purely academic distinction in classical Islamic thought – to
excuse modern Muslims from believing in ‘backwards’ or ‘irrational’ beliefs. Before
Mernissi, no classical Muslim scholar had used historical reports about Abū Hurayra or Abū
Bakra to claim a misogynist conspiracy at the root of Islamic law.
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
For the best introductions to the revolution of modernity, see the Conclusion of Keith Thomas’
Religion and the Decline of Magic (New York: Oxford University Press, 1971) and Marshall
Hodgson, The Venture of Islam (University of Chicago Press, 1974) vol. 3, pp. 163–248. The
most useful books on debates over hadiths in the modern Muslim world are Daniel Brown’s
superb Rethinking Tradition in Modern Islamic Thought (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1996) and G.H.A. Juynboll’s The Authenticity of the Tradition Literature (Leiden:
Brill, 1969). For more general discussions of modern Islamic thought, see Albert Hourani’s
Arab Thought in the Liberal Age (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983) and Aziz
Ahmad’s Islamic Modernism in India and Pakistan (London: Oxford University Press, 1967).
The two best resources on Salafism are Henri Lauzière, The Making of Salafism (Columbia
University Press, 2016) and Roel Meijer, ed., Global Salafism (Columbia University Press,
2009). A recent study on the Quran-only movement is Ali Usman Qasmi, Questioning the
Authority of the Past: The Ahl al-Qur’an Movement in the Punjab (Oxford University Press,
2011). For more on the eighteenth-century movements of revival and reform, see John Voll,
‘Foundations of Renewal and Reform: Islamic Movements in the Eighteenth and Nineteenth
Centuries,’ in The Oxford History of Islam, ed. John Esposito, pp. 509–548 (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1999) and the initial chapters of Barbara Metcalf’s Islamic Revivalism in
British India: Deoband 1860–1900 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1982).
A difficult-to-find translation of Abū Rayya’s al-Adwā’ ‘alā al-sunna al-muhammadiyya has
been published as Lights on the Muhammadan Sunna, trans. Hasan Najafi (Qum: Ansariyan
Publications, 1999). Muhammad Husayn Haykal’s biography of the Prophet, translated by
Ismail al-Faruqi, has been published in several editions as The Life of Muhammad. Yūsuf al-
Qaradāwī’s influential Kayfa nata‘āmalu ma‘a al-sunna al-nabawiyya has been translated as
Approaching the Sunna: Comprehension and Controversy, trans. Jamil Qureshi (Washington
DC: International Institute of Islamic Thought, 2007). Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan’s response to
William Muir’s critique of the sīra has been published as A Series of Essays on the Life of
Muhammad (Lahore: Premier Book House, 1968), and Shibli Numani’s biography of the
Prophet has been published as Sirat-un-Nabi: The Life of the Prophet, 2 vols. (Delhi: Idarat
Adabiyat Deli, 1979).
ENDNOTES
  1   Al-San‘ānī, Irshād al-nuqqād ilā taysīr al-ijtihād, p. 58.
  2   Al-San‘ānī, Dīwān al-Amīr al-San‘ānī, p. 168.
  3   ‘Abdallāh al-Ghumārī, Al-Khawātir al-dīniyya, vol. 1, p. 123; Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Sāwī, Hāshiyat al-Sāwī ‘alā
Tafsīr al-Jalālayn, vol. 3, p. 9.
  4   Aziz Ahmad, Islamic Modernism in India and Pakistan, pp. 60–61. Ibn Hanbal does show extreme skepticism towards

 claims of consensus; ‘Abdallāh b. Ahmad, Masā’il al-imām Ahmad, p. 439.
  5   Aziz Ahmad, Islamic Modernism in India and Pakistan, p. 63.
  6   Ibid., p. 59.
  7   Daniel Brown, Rethinking Tradition in Modern Islamic Thought, pp. 38–39.
  8   Ibid., p. 98.
  9   Ibid., pp. 46–47.
  10  Muhammad Tawfīq Sidqī, ‘al-Islām huwa al-Qur’ān wahdahu,’ pp. 516–517; idem, ‘al-Islām huwa al-Qur’ān wahdahu:
radd li-radd,’ p. 912 (found in Ridā, ed., al-Manār 9, n. 7 and 12).
  11  Sidqī, ‘al-Islām huwa al-Qur’ān wahdahu: radd li-radd,’ p. 910.
  12  Sidqī, ‘al-Islām huwa al-Qur’ān wahdahu,’ p. 524.
  13  Sidqī, ‘al-Islām huwa al-Qur’ān wahdahu: radd li-radd,’ p. 911.
  14  Juynboll, The Authenticity of the Tradition Literature: Discussions in Modern Egypt, pp. 28–30; Brown, Rethinking
Tradition, p. 89.
  15  Sunan Abī Dāwūd: kitāb al-at‘ima, bāb fī al-dhubāb yaqa‘u fī al-ta‘ām; Sahīh al-Bukhārī: kitāb al-tibb, bāb idhā
waqa‘a al-dhubāb fī al-inā’.
  16  Juynboll, Authenticity, p. 141.
  17  Brown, Rethinking Tradition, p. 47.
  18  Muhammad Husayn Haykal, Hayāt Muhammad, p. 67.
  19  Ibid., pp. 64–66.
  20  Abū Rayya, Adwā’ ‘alā al-sunna al-muhammadiyya, pp. 350–351.
  21  Ibid., pp. 252 ff., 278.
  22  Juynboll, Authenticity, pp. 41–43; see Sahīh al-Bukhārī: kitāb al-adhān, bāb fadl al-ta’dhīn. Ibn Hajar notes that this
should not be understood literally; Ibn Hajar, Fath al-bārī, vol. 2, pp. 108–109.
  23  Abū Rayya, Adwā’, p. 233.
  24  Ibid., p. 148.
  25  Ibid., pp. 151 ff.
  26  Ibid., p. 169.
  27  Juynboll, Authenticity, pp. 88, 133.
  28  Abū Rayya, Adwā’, p. 169.
  29  Abū Rayya, ‘Ka‘b al-Ahbār huwa al-sahyūnī al-awwal,’ al-Risāla wa’l-riwāya 665 (1946), pp. 360–62.
  30  Abū Rayya, Adwā’, pp. 140 ff.
  31  Juynboll, Authenticity, pp. 30–40.
  32  Brown, Rethinking Tradition, p. 57. Al-Albānī also argues that the Prophet’s speech is part of the revelation God
promises to protect in the Quran; al-Albānī, Adab al-zaffāf, p. 168–9.
  33 Wadud does not deal with hadiths in her discussion, while Kugle avoids discussing hadiths that command the death penalty
for those ‘committing the sin of the people of Lot’ because they are not in the Sahīhayn (they are found in the Four
Sunan). See Amina Wadud, The Quran and Woman (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999) and Scott Kugle,
‘Sexuality, Diversity and Ethics in the Agenda of Progressive Muslims,’ in Progressive Muslims, ed. Omid Safi (Oxford:
Oneworld, 2003), pp. 220–221.
  34  See http://www.yuksel.org/e/books/rtq.htm (last accessed 11/1/07).
  35  Fatema Mernissi, Women and Islam: An Historical and Theological Enquiry, p. 77.
  36  Ibid., p. 43.
  37  Sahīh Muslim: kitāb al-salāt, bāb al-i‘tirād bayn yaday al-musallī; Sahih al-Bukhārī: kitāb al-fitan, bāb 18.
  38  Mernissi, pp. 56 ff., 71–72.
  39  Ibid., p. 60.
  40  Ibid., p. 76.
  41  Fazlur Rahman, Islamic Methodology in History, pp. 6, 33.
  42  Ibid. p. 6, 12.
  43  Ibid., pp. 15–16, 19.
  44  Ibid., p. 56.
  45   Ibid., pp. 72–73.
  46  Ibid., p. 40.
  47  Ibid., p. 72.
  48   Javed Ahmad Ghamidi, Islam: A Comprehensive Introduction, pp. 61–69.
  49  Ahmad, Islamic Modernism, p. 53.

   50  Ibid., p. 31.
  51  Ibid., p. 41.
  52  Aziz Ahmad and G.E. von Grunebaum, eds., Muslim Self-Statement in India and Pakistan 1857–1968, p. 34; Ahmad,
Islamic Modernism, pp. 43, 46.
  53  Ahmad and von Grunebaum, p. 30.
  54  Ahmad, Islamic Modernism, p. 54.
  55  Christian W. Troll, Sayyid Ahmad Khan: A Reinterpretation of Muslim Theology, p. 113.
  56  Ibid., pp. 134, 139–140.
  57  Ahmad, Islamic Modernism, pp. 49 ff.
  58  Troll, pp. 137–139.
  59  Brown, Rethinking Tradition, p. 64.
  60  Ahmad, Islamic Modernism, pp. 47–48.
  61  Troll, p. 129.
  62  Ibid., p. 141.
  63  Ibid., p. 111.
  64  Juynboll, Authenticity, p. 15.
  65  Muhammad ‘Abduh, The Theology of Unity, pp. 155–156.
  66  Ridā, Al-Manār, 21, no.1, p. 67.
  67  Muhammad al-Ghazālī, Turāthunā al-fikrī, p. 176.
  68  Ridā, Al-Manār, 27, no. 8, p. 616.
  69  Ridā, Al-Manār, 27, no. 7, pp. 539 ff., 615; ibid., 28, no. 1, p. 67. See al-Jāhiz, al-Hayawān, ed. ‘Abd al-Salām Hārūn
(Beirut: Dār al-Jīl, 1996), vol. 4, pp. 202–3.
  70  Ridā, Al-Manār, 27, no. 8, p. 615; ibid., p. 3:620.
  71  Ridā, Al-Manār, 19, no. 2, p. 100.
  72  Juynboll, Authenticity, pp. 145–146; ‘Abd al-Majīd Mahmūd, Abū Ja‘far al-Tahāwī wa atharuhu fī al-hadīth, p. 117.
  73  Ridā, Al-Manār, 27, no. 8, p. 615; Sahīh al-Bukhārī: kitāb bad’ al-khalq, bāb sifat al-shams wa al-qamar.
  74  Juynboll, Authenticity, p. 143.
  75  Mahmūd Shaltūt, Al-Fatāwā, p. 52.
  76  Ibid., pp. 61 ff., 82.
  77  Ibid., p. 79.
  78  Al-Ghazālī, Turāthunā al-fikrī, p. 169.
  79  Ibid., p. 181.
  80  Al-Ghazālī, al-Sunna al-nabawiyya, p. 190.
  81  Ibid., pp. 35–36.
  82  Brown, The Canonization of al-Bukhārī and Muslim, pp. 309–310.
  83  Al-Albānī, ‘Tarjamat al-shaykh al-Albānī – Nash’at al-Shaykh fī Dimashq.’
  84  Al-Albānī, Sahīh al-Targhīb wa al-tarhīb, p. 1:60.
  85  ‘Abdallāh al-Sa‘d, ‘Sharh al-Mūqiza 3.’
  86  Al-Albānī, ‘Tafsīr 1.’
  87  Al-Albānī, ‘Tafsīr 2.’
  88  ‘Abdallāh al-Sa‘d, ‘Sharh Kitāb al-Tamyīz 3.’
  89  Al-Albānī, Tafsīr 3.’
  90  Tāhir al-Jazā’irī, Tawjīh al-nazar ilā usūl al-athar, vol. 1, pp. 331–332.
  91  Al-Albānī, ‘Silsilat as’ilat Abī Ishāq al-Huwaynī li’l-shaykh Muhammad Nāsir al-Dīn al-Albānī.’
  92  Al-Albānī, Sahīh al-Targhīb wa al-tarhīb, vol. 1, p. 4.
  93  Al-Jazā’irī, Tawjīh al-nazar ilā usūl al-athar, p. 1:320.
  94  ‘Abdallāh al-Ghumārī, Tawjīh al-‘ināya li-ta‘rīf ‘ilm al-hadīth riwāya wa dirāya, p. 15.
  95  Ahmad al-Ghumārī, Dar’ al-da‘f ‘an hadīth man ‘ashiqa fa-‘aff, p. 121.
  96  ‘Abdallāh al-Ghumārī, Itqān al-san‘a fī tahqīq ma‘nā al-bid‘a, p. 41; Ahmad al-Ghumārī, Ju’nat al-attār, vol. 2, p. 154.
  97  Al-Albānī, Mukhtasar Sahīh al-Bukhārī, vol. 2, pp. 8–9.
  98  Al-Kawtharī, Maqālāt, p. 225.
  99  Al-Ghazālī, al-Sunna al-nabawiyya, pp. 14–15.
100  ‘Mā kāna ‘alā khilāf al-qiyās fa-‘alayhi ghayruhu lā yuqās,’ al-Albānī, ‘al-Zawāj.’
101  ‘Alī Jum‘a, al-Bayān li-mā yushghalu bihi al-adhhān, pp. 99 ff.
102  Al-Ghazālī, Turāthunā al-fikrī, p. 153. Jum‘a, al-Bayān, pp. 103–4.

 103  Al-Ghazālī, al-Sunna al-nabawiyya, p. 19.
104  Al-Kawtharī, Maqālāt, p. 55.
105  Al-Ghazālī, al-Sunna al-nabawiyya, p. 32.
106  Ibid., pp. 19–20.
107  Sahīh al-Bukhārī: kitāb al-jihād, bāb 149.
108  Jum‘a, al-Bayān, pp. 78–81.
109  J. Brown, ‘The Rules of Matn Criticism: There are No Rules,’ pp. 389–91.
110  Al-Shāfi‘ī, al-Risāla, p. 177.
111  Tārīkh Baghdād, vol. 11, pp. 197–198.
112  Ibn Qutayba, Ta’wīl mukhtalif al-hadīth, p. 228.
i  Earlier in this chapter we referred to Muhammad al-Ghazālī as a Modernist Salafī. In terms of the structure of his thought, this
is correct. But al-Ghazālī’s environment, Egypt in the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s, was much more religiously conservative than that
of ‘Abduh or Shaltūt. As a result, in his language and positions al-Ghazālī fits into the Late Sunni Traditionalist category.
ii  Although al-Albānī rules that this hadith is authentic, he also notes that it cannot be interpreted literally since we know that the
Prophet ate beef; al-Albānī, Silsilat al-ahādīth al-sahīha, p. 4:46.

 11
CONCLUSION
We must possess a grasp of the hadith tradition and its many functions in order to understand
the past and present of the Islamic world. This grasp is indispensable for comprehending
Muslim debates over the future as well. When we look behind the headlines today, we see that
much of the time hadiths are at the vortex of the most salient debates in Islamic thought. On
controversial issues from jihad and martyrdom to women’s rights under Islamic law, hadiths
always provide key and often determinative evidence. As we have seen, even those Muslims
who reject heeding hadiths at all in such debates face the challenge of justifying this position
with evidence from the classical hadith tradition.
Even if we understand the importance of hadiths in parsing complex problematics such as
‘Islam and the West’ or ‘Islam and Women,’ we must always keep history in mind. History
gave birth to the complexities of the present and holds the keys to unraveling them. Debates
over the necessity of hadiths, their place in articulating Islamic law and dogma, and how
Muslims should know true claims about reve-lation from the false have been of perennial
importance throughout Islamic history.
Let us retrace some of the main thematic steps in the reasoning of Muslim scholars throughout
Islamic history, specifically those regarding hadiths. If the Quran is God’s manifest revelation
to mankind, do we need any other source for understanding His religion? If not, then how do
we know how to perform (or, perhaps, how do we justify the fact that we perform) our five
daily prayers and fast during Ramadan? – these practices are not explained in the holy book. If
we do need another source, then does our sense of reason alone suffice? The answer seems to
be ‘no,’ as reason on its own cannot provide the basis or specifics for Muslim prayer and
fasting, which can only be known through some form of tradition handed down from
Muhammad and the early Muslim community. If we must rely to some extent on this tradition,
then how do we balance it with the Quran and reason? What happens when revelation, reason,
and tradition seem to conflict? Does tradition trump reason and our prima facie understanding
of the Quran, or vice versa? If we are to subordinate some elements of our rational thought and
understanding of the Quran to tradition, how do we know when tradition is authentic or
inauthentic? How is tradition transmitted or preserved? If tradition overrules the Quran and
reason, then can the principles of the Quran or reason be used to authenticate tradition? These
are some of the questions that have driven Islamic intellectual history in its various streams
and embodiments.
In this book, we have proposed thinking about hadiths in terms of their two essential
functions in Islamic civilization. First, the hadith as a text (matn) – authoritative statements by
the Prophet that shape Islamic law, dogma, and worldview. Second, the hadith as a chain of
transmission (isnād) – a medium of connection to the Prophet and a paradigm of constructing a
relationship between the Muslim present and the Muslim past. Interestingly, in both these

 cases, the functions of hadiths and the questions surrounding them are common to faith
traditions other than Islam.
In an interpretive tradition, namely one in which meaning is developed by turning (back)
towards and interpreting an authoritative source such as a revealed text or constitution, the
interpreter of the source is effectively more powerful than the source itself. Using the analogy
of a king or ruler, the king’s interpreter is more powerful than the king himself, since the
interpreter controls and shapes the king’s message. Similarly, it is the lens through which we
view an object that controls our perception of that object, not the object itself.
Early in Islamic history, both Sunni and Shiite Muslims decided that the Quran was a source
that had to be interpreted through specific lenses. It could not speak on its own (‘Quran only’
advocates today have challenged this). The Prophet was the first interpreter, and his Sunna was
what the Muslim scholar ‘Alī Jum‘a has called ‘an infallible application of the Book of God.’1
But who, in turn, would interpret the Prophet’s Sunna? Who would provide the second
interpretive layer that would translate the Sunna and apply it among the coming Muslim
generations in new Muslim lands? Sunnis chose the Muslim community as a whole,
represented by the ulema, as the authoritative interpreter, while Shiite Muslims selected the
family of the Prophet and the scholars who followed in the footsteps of the imams.
But how should the Sunna be communicated and preserved? Some Sunnis believed that the
Sunna was preserved mainly in the form of communal practice (like the Mālikī school of law),
others in the form of the methods of problem-solving inherited from the Prophet through his
Companions and their Successors (like the Partisans of Reason). The Quran is a written text,
but these approaches treated the Sunna as a living and unwritten entity. Ultimately, Sunnis
accepted that the Sunna must take a written form as well, that of hadiths. Although Sunni
scholars continue to debate the proper relationship between practice, interpretive method, and
the text of hadiths to this day, Muslim scholars generally recognize that hadiths are a powerful,
even if not the ultimate, vehicle for the Sunna.
This process is common to Islam, Judaism, and Christianity. In all these traditions, a written
scripture is interpreted through an oral lens that is eventually also consigned to written form.
Classical rabbinic Judaism is based on the idea that Moses received two Torahs on Mount
Sinai, the written revelation of the scriptures, designated collectively as the Written Torah, and
an oral Torah, which transmitted the authoritative interpretations of these books. This oral
tradition was inherited from Moses by subsequent leaders of the Jewish people through the
biblical period and on through the time of the rabbis. Eventually, in the early third century CE
it was set down in written form in the Mishna.
Among Christians, a Greek translation of the Old Testament served as the community’s
revealed scripture during the first two centuries CE. Christians read and understood the
significance of the Old Testament through the orally transmitted teachings of Jesus and the
elucidations of the Christian church fathers – the stories of the Old Testament and
pronouncements of Hebrew prophets like Isaiah were interpreted as referring allegorically or
literally to Christ. At the same time as the Jews were setting down their oral Torah in written
form, the Christians adopted as their written interpretive lens a selection of written accounts of

 Jesus’ life and mission in the form of the New Testament Gospels.2
In Islam more than in the other Abrahamic traditions, however, there arose a particular
interpretive problem. From the time of the Prophet and the revelation of the Quran itself,
Muslims have been self-consciously obsessed with textual authenticity. The Quran explains
that previous communities had corrupted or altered the revealed books of God. Muslim
scholars therefore proclaimed an enduring devotion to assuring the authenticity of their
religion’s teachings and its textual sources. This is most obvious in the text of the Quran itself.
From the time of Muhammad’s Companions, Muslim scholars have obsessively safeguarded
the textual integrity of the Quran, meticulously recording any variations in wording or
pronunciation.
The hadith corpus, however, was not set down in writing at such an early date, so the
authenticity of this interpretive lens quickly became a major matter of contention. Early Sunni
Muslims developed their methods of isnād criticism in an effort to assure the textual
authenticity of the Sunna without relying on the same flawed rational faculties that had led
earlier nations astray. However, the tension between surrendering to the isnād and its power to
authenticate versus the role of reason as a criterion for evaluating truth remains unresolved
among Muslim scholars.
When Sunni legal theory matured fully in the tenth and eleventh centuries CE, scholars
grappled with a more philosophical problem: how can you interpret a source whose historical
reliability is certain (the Quran) through a lens of questionable historical reliability (hadiths)?
Classical Sunni legal theorists employed the concepts of consensus (ijmā‘) and the certainty
produced by massive transmission (tawātur) to reach a solution to this problem, but it
continues to drive the debate between Islamic modernists and traditionalists today.
Interestingly, there are remarkable similarities between the Islamic tradition of hadith
criticism and a genre of books in Chinese Zen Buddhism known as Ching Lu, which flourished
among Chinese Buddhist scholars in the period just before and during the Tang dynasty (618–
907 CE). Ching Lu books were catalogs devoted to distinguishing between writings that were
thought to be authentic records of the Buddha’s teachings as transmitted to China from India
and books that were written by Chinese scholars and thus did not originate in the Buddhist
homeland of India. With an attitude very similar to Muslim hadith critics, the authors of Ching
Lu books saw themselves as sorting the ‘rubies from pebbles’ in a struggle to preserve the
authentic teachings of the Buddha from the accretions of Chinese philosophy and superstition.
Unlike Muslim hadith critics, however, Ching Lu authors depended primarily on searching for
anomalous contents in the books they critiqued – teachings that resembled Chinese lore, for
example, were red flags for forgery. Although identifying the authors or translators of books of
Buddhist teachings served as part of the Ching Lu critical arsenal, the absence of an elaborate
isnād tradition and the many anonymously written texts made such transmission criticism much
less common than in the Islamic hadith tradition.3
The second function of hadiths, that of a medium of connection to the Prophet and a
framework for imagining historical relationships through the isnād, is only partially concerned
with authenticity. It is more than anything the foundation of a religious worldview. Although the

 isnād was developed as a tool for authenticating hadiths, it reflected and eventually became the
embodiment of a more general conception of the transmission of authority. The isnād was the
key to distinguishing between reliable and unreliable hadiths for Muslim scholars, but it was
also a language for expressing connections with teachers, saints, and the Prophet himself.
As a criterion for textual reliability, the strength and historical accuracy of an isnād was
essential. As a medium for connection, the isnād took on a meaning far beyond and indeed in
spite of its historicity. Even if only as a formality, possessing some sort of isnād back to the
Prophet was the essential mark of a Muslim scholar. Short isnāds for hadiths became a means
of close connection to the Prophet’s blessings. Bizarre isnāds were collected like rare coins –
it was the rarity and supposed shortness of an isnād that made it valuable, not the authenticity
of the hadith it communicated. In Sufism, the isnād was the chain of transmission for the
Prophet’s blessings (baraka), ethical instruction, and esoteric knowledge. The cloak (khirqa)
served as the outward manifestation of this chain, literally a means of investiture into the
socially expansive class of Sufi devotees.
Even in its abstract sense of a connection to the first and most authoritative interpreter of
God’s revelation, the Prophet, however, the isnād had practical groundings. Arabic texts,
whether individual hadiths or entire treatises, were written in a script that left many vowels
unwritten and that could easily be misread. Reading a book or a hadith properly thus required
the presence of a teacher who had heard that text read aloud. Transmission from teacher to
student, however, involved more than just this practical utility. Muslim scholars believe that
this living relationship passed on the light of sacred learning and the ‘living word of
knowledge,’ as Plato (d. 347 BCE) called it, from one generation to the next.4 Transmission
creates and passes on authority.
Muslims have often touted this connective function of the isnād as unique to Islamic thought.
Indeed, neither Christianity nor Judaism developed a tradition as intricate or ubiquitous as the
isnād. But the concept of transmission creating and controlling interpretive authority is also a
common theme in other traditions.5 When the Christian philosopher and maverick theologian
Peter Abelard (d. 1142 CE) dared to offer a class in which he provided his own commentary
on biblical scripture, students were aghast. To innovate one’s own commentary on the
scriptures without having the collective commentaries of generations of church scholars
painstakingly explained by a teacher, one’s link to this interpretive chain, was unthinkable.6 In
medieval Judaism the concept of a chain of transmission that passed on an understanding of the
revealed scriptures and bequeathed authority in the process was known as ‘the chain of
tradition (shalshelet hakabbalah).’7
The commonalities that the Islamic hadith tradition shares with other faith traditions remind
us of the supreme importance of context at the close of this study. The grand tradition of
Muslim hadith criticism emphasizes the paramount place of authenticity in the Islamic
religious worldview. When the great hadith scholar al-Khatīb al-Baghdādī died in 1071 CE,
crowds carrying his casket through the streets of Baghdad shouted ‘Make way! Make way for
him who fended off lies from the Messenger of God!’8
But discussing the words attributed to Muhammad, debating their authenticity and potential

 meaning, has never been a discourse that has taken place in objective or neutral isolation.
Always there are great consequences. Discussions of the proper place of the Prophet’s Sunna
began among Muslims in the shadow of unspoken assumptions about the true nature of God’s
message to Muhammad. Ever looming over these debates have been weighty implications for
how that religion would take shape on earth. If we cannot trust a body of hadiths, Muslims have
asked, or if we lose the hadith corpus to modern historical criticism, how do we know God’s
will and sacred law? As al-Shāfi‘ī asked, how do we know how to pray?9 Torn between a
commitment to critical rigor and the duty to provide answers for the masses, Muslim hadith
critics have always had to balance the scholarly integrity of rigorous historians with the needs
and expectations of the Muslim community as a whole.
In no matter have consequences been more intimidating than in that of protecting the purity of
the Prophet’s message from alien influences. The study and criticism of hadiths among Muslims
began as a means to protect the Muslim community from competing claims to truth, such as
Greek philosophy, Christian thought, or purely rational approaches to law and worship. The
Partisans of Hadith, who later formed the core of Sunni Islam, and the isnād itself arose as a
conservative reaction to fears of the foreign influence that other Near Eastern faiths and
philosophies might have upon the still maturing Muslim community. Later, debates over the
isnāds of Sufism centered on doubts over and defenses of the Islamic authenticity of Sufi
beliefs and practices. Concerns over the influence of Greek philosophy or Christianity have
faded into history. But today questioning whether or not Muslims can trust the historical
reliability of hadiths conjures the twin specters of Western control over defining Islam and
Muslims’ anxieties about how to reconcile their faith with the hegemonic power of Western
science. Always there are consequences for Muslims’ sense of Islamic authenticity.
Difficult as it has been to achieve in reality, Muslim scholars have always clung to the ideal
of freeing the historical criticism of words attributed to Muhammad from the grasp of
consequence and the hopes and multiform fears that always surround us. Yet the modern world
is perilous and unrelenting in its temptations and terrors. After our discussion of Muslim and
Western perspectives on the hadith tradition and Islamic history, we are left with a great
quandary for both Muslim and non-Muslim scholars: what forces should determine our
interactions with the past? Plato’s Socratic voice, a voice long heeded in Islamic civilization
as intently as it has been in the West, echoes across the aeons: ‘I have heard a report of the
ancients, whether it is true or not only they know; although if we had found the truth ourselves,
do you think that we should care much about the opinions of men?’10
 
Wa Allāhu a‘lam (And God knows best).
ENDNOTES
  1  ‘Alī Jum‘a, personal communication.
  2  James A. Sanders, Canon and Community, p. 14.
  3  Kyoko Tokuno, ‘The Evaluation of Indigenous Scriptures in Chinese Buddhist Bibliographical Catalogues,’ pp. 31–59.
  4  Plato, Phaedrus, p. 276a.
  5  Al-Nawawī, Sharh Sahīh Muslim, vol. 1, p. 119.

   6  Peter Abelard, ‘Historia Calimatatum,’ p. 63.
  7  See Pirkei Avot, 1.1; Martin Jaffe, Torah in the Mouth (Oxford University Press, 2001), pp. 30, 56–61.
  8  Al-Dhahabī, Tadhkirat al-huffāz, vol. 3, p. 226.
  9  Al-Shāfi‘ī, al-Risāla, p. 177.
10  Plato, Phaedrus, p. 274c.

 GLOSSARY
‘Adl: literally, ‘justice’ or ‘just’; half of the qualification for being a reliable hadith transmitter
(along with dabt). In the early period of hadith criticism, being ‘adl simply meant generally
being an honest and truthful person. In the later period of hadith criticism, ‘adl meant being
‘Muslim, of age, of sound mind, free of the paths of sin and flaws in honor.’ This later
definition included not being an extremist or proselytizing member of a non-Sunni group.
Āhād: literally ‘individuals’; a category of hadiths transmitted by individuals as opposed to
being massively transmitted (mutawātir). Āhād hadiths were any hadiths that did not meet the
requirements for massive transmission (tawātur). This categorization was introduced into
Muslim hadith scholarship in the tenth and eleventh centuries CE by legal theorists.
Ahl-e Quran: a twentieth-century Muslim school of thought particularly prominent in India and
later Pakistan, which advocated the rejection of hadiths and a reliance on the Quran alone (see
pp. 280–286).
Akhbār: ‘reports’; transmitted stories about historical events. Akhbār as a category includes
hadiths, but akhbār often do not involve the life of the Prophet or feature isnāds. Muslim
scholars such as Ibn Ishāq (d. 150/767) and al-Madā’inī (d. 228/843), who collected and
compiled akhbār (Akhbāriyūn), are closer to ‘historians’ than ‘hadith scholars.’
‘Ālī: ‘elevated’; a transmission of a hadith with a relatively short isnād (see pp. 48–51).
Amālī: hadith dictation sessions, often occurring in major mosques, in which a scholar read
out a selection of hadiths with full isnāds back to the Prophet before an audience.
Ansāb: ‘genealogies’; an early genre of Arab-Islamic historical writing that traced and
recorded the genealogies of tribes along with stories and historical information about
individuals.
Ash‘arī: one of the three main schools of Sunni theology, named after Abū al-Hasan al-Ash‘arī
(d. 324/935–6), which began as a defense of Sunni literalist theology using rationalist methods
but later incorpor-ated many rationalist beliefs into Sunni Islam as well.
Baraka: ‘blessings’ ; the spiritual benefit that one receives from proximity to God, the Prophet,
or pious individuals.
Bid‘a: literally ‘innovation’; although it is generally understood as heretical innovation in
religious matters.
Companions (Arabic, Sahāba): the founding generation of Muslims who knew and lived with
the Prophet. In Sunni Islam, anyone who saw the Prophet and died as a Muslim is considered a
Companion (see pp. 89–91).
Dabt: literally ‘accuracy’; or the requirement that a hadith transmitter generally be
corroborated in his or her transmissions. Along with ‘adāla (see ‘adl), dabt was one of the two
components necessary to make a transmitter ‘reliable (thiqa)’ – although dabt was the more
important of the two.

 Da‘īf: ‘weak’; a complex term that generally denoted an unreliable hadith (see pp. 102–106).
Gharīb: ‘strange’; denoting a hadith with limited corroboration but not necessarily meaning
that it contradicted more reliable hadiths or was unreliable (see p. 98). In the later period of
hadith criticism it was used to describe a hadith that was sahīh but was only known through
one chain of transmission.
Hasan: ‘fair’; a term describing a hadith that, while not meeting the isnād requirements to be
sahīh, either did not have flaws serious enough to be considered weak or enjoyed some form
of bolstering corroboration. Hasan hadiths were admissible as proofs in law but not theology
(see p. 105).
Idrāj: the phenomenon of the words of a hadith transmitter being mistaken for part of the hadith
itself (see mudraj).
Ihsān: the highest level of faith for Muslims, namely acting as if you could physically sense
God watching over you (see p. 198).
Ijāza: the permission to transmit a hadith or book. Ijāzas could take three forms: 1) ijāzat al-
riwāya (the permission of transmission), which simply gave a student the right to transmit a
hadith from a scholar; 2) ijāzat al-dirāya (the permission of knowledge), which meant that a
teacher had acknowledged that a student had mastered the contents of a book and was thus
qualified to teach it to others; 3) ijāzat al-tazkiya (the permission of purification), which meant
that a student had spent sufficient time around a scholar to absorb that scholar’s ethics and
good behavior, with that chain of learning going back to the Prophet (see pp. 44–46).
Ijtihād: independent interpretation; the action of a scholar returning to the Quran, Sunna, and
interpretive methods of Muslim scholars to revaluate a legal ruling or find an answer to an
unanswered question.
‘Ilal: plural of ‘illa, or ‘flaw’; flaws in the isnād of a hadith that only become evident when
that isnād is compared with other chains of transmission for that hadith (see pp. 98–99).
Imam: in Sunni Islam, either the person leading the prayer or an exceptionally prominent
scholar; in Shiite Islam, one of the descendants of the Prophet who inherited his interpretive
authority.
Isnād: the chain of transmission of a hadith.
Isrā’īliyyāt: stories from Jewish lore, usually about biblical prophets, included in the Islamic
tradition.
Jinn: creatures mentioned in the Quran and hadiths who are composed of fire or hot wind and
live unseen alongside human beings.
Kashf: ‘unveiling’; direct inspiration from God granted to a pious Muslim (see pp. 114–115).
Khirqa: the shawl or cloak with which a Sufi initiate was invested when joining a Sufi order
or receiving the blessings of a Sufi saint (see pp. 202–204).
Late Sunni Tradition: the version of Sunni orthodoxy that emerged in the 1300s and has
characterized Islamic civilization in the Middle East and South Asia until the modern period. It

 consists of an institutional combination of the four Sunni schools of law, the Ash‘arī or
Māturīdī schools of speculative theology, and Sufi brotherhoods.
Madhhab: a Muslim school of law.
Maghāzī: literally ‘campaigns’; early collections of reports about the Prophet’s battles and the
early Muslim conquests.
Mahdī: ‘the guided one’; an apocalyptical figure descended from the Prophet whom both
Sunnis and Shiites believe will return at the end of time to bring justice to the earth.
Mashhūr: in the early period of hadith criticism, mashhūr meant a hadith that was well
known, widely corroborated, and held to be an authentic representation of the Prophet’s Sunna.
With the influence of legal theorists in the tenth and eleventh centuries, it took on the meaning
of a hadith that, while not reaching the technical requirements for the certainty provided by
massive transmission (tawātur), had been verified by communal consensus and was thus
reliable enough to inform dogma and restrict the meaning of Quranic verses.
Matn: the text of a hadith.
Mudraj: adjective describing a hadith in which idrāj (see above) has occurred.
Mu‘jam: a hadith collection in which a scholar organized hadiths around a certain theme.
Munkar: ‘unacceptable’ or merely ‘unfamiliar’; in the early period of hadith criticism it meant
a hadith that was either uncorroborated or broke with other similar narrations either in its
isnād or its meaning. In the later period, it came to mean a hadith that had only one chain of
transmission without that isnād being strong enough to justify accepting it.
Munqati‘: ‘broken’; an isnād in which some transmitter, usually not in the early part of the
isnād, cites a source whom he never actually met.
Mursal: literally ‘cast’; in the early period of hadith criticism it meant a hadith in which a
transmitter cited someone or the Prophet without actually having met him. The term later came
to mean a hadith in which a Successor quotes the Prophet without naming the intermediating
Companion (see pp. 94–95).
Mustakhraj: a genre of hadith collections in which a scholar used his own hadith corpus to
replicate an existing hadith collection (see pp. 52–54).
Mutāba‘a: ‘parallelism’; a narration that corroborated that a certain person had heard a hadith
from a certain teacher by serving as evidence that a different student had heard the same hadith
from that teacher (see pp. 95–98).
Mutawātir: ‘massively transmitted’; a term imported into hadith criticism from legal theory to
describe a hadith that is so widely transmitted that there can be no possibility of it being forged
(see p. 107).
Mu‘tazila: a school of Muslim rationalists that died out in Sunni Islam in the fourteenth century
CE but survived in Imami and Zaydi Shiism.
Muttasil: ‘contiguous’; describing an isnād whose components all met and studied with one

 another and thus includes no breaks.
Naskh: the abrogation of Quranic verses either by other verses or the Sunna. Also, it can be
the abrogation of one hadith by another hadith.
Nāzil: a relatively long isnād for a hadith; the opposite of ‘ālī.
Qudsī: adjective for hadiths in which the Prophet quotes God speaking (see p. 63–64).
Sahīh: ‘sound’ or ‘authentic’; the highest level of strength for an isnād (see pp. 104–107).
Salafī: a complex and multifaceted term that came into use in the early twentieth century to
describe the return to the methods and beliefs of the Salaf, ‘the Righteous Forebears,’ usually
understood to mean the first three generations of Muslims.
Sariqat al-hadīth: ‘stealing a hadith,’ or fitting an existing hadith with a new isnād.
Shādhdh: ‘anomalous’; although influential hadith critics like al-Hākim al-Naysābūrī (d.
405/1014) used the term shādhdh to mean a hadith that had only one narration, al-Shāfi‘ī (d.
204/820) and the vast majority of scholars used it to mean a hadith that contradicted more
reliable narrations or the Quran.
Shāhid: a ‘witness’ narration or attestation, usually meaning a hadith narrated from a totally
different isnād but containing the same meaning as the hadith in question and thus bolstering its
reliability.
Sharh: a commentary that a scholar composes about an existing book, such as a hadith
collection or book of law.
Sīra: literally ‘biography’; generally referring to the biography of the Prophet. Sīra is distinct
from hadith collections because it follows a chronological or narrative structure and often
includes material without complete isnāds.
Successors: the generation of Muslims who followed and learned from the Companions.
Tadlīs: obfuscation in transmission; either intentionally or unintentionally narrating a hadith in
a manner that obscures or omits transmitters in the isnād.
Tafsīr: Quranic exegesis; during the first two centuries Hijrī tafsīr mainly consisted of glosses,
or explanations of Quranic words. It soon developed into a genre of more expansive Quranic
commentary on the linguistic contents, historical circumstances and meanings of verses.
Takhrīj: ‘indexing’; finding all the appearances of a hadith in various books and hadith
collections.
Taqlīd: ‘imitation’; a term with both positive and pejorative connotations. Supporters of taqlīd
define it as a non-scholar or non-specialist following the opinion of a qualified scholar. Those
who reject taqlīd, especially adherents of the Salafī tradition, would translate it as ‘blind
imitation,’ namely following scholars without any concern for proof.
Taraf/Atrāf: the first part of the text of a hadith or its most well-known part.
Ulema: the Arabic word for Muslim scholars.

 Sunna: the normative precedent of the Prophet. In the early Islamic period, Sunna meant the
normative precedent of the early Islamic community (namely the Companions and the
Successors) as a whole.
Zawā’id: a genre of hadith books that listed all the hadiths found in books outside the hadith
canon as well as any narrations of hadiths from the canonical collections found in the non-
canonical works.

 BIBLIOGRAPHY
PRIMARY SOURCES
‘Abdallāh b. Ahmad b. Hanbal. Kitāb al-sunna, ed. Muhammad al-Qahtānī. Dammam, Dār Ibn al-Qayyim, 1986
—— Masā’il al-imām Ahmad Ibn Hanbal riwāyat ibnihi, ed. Zuhayr al-Shāwīsh. Beirut, al-Maktab al-Islāmī, 1981
‘Abduh, Muhammad. The Theology of Unity, trans. Ishaq Musa’ad and Kenneth Cragg. London, George Allen & Unwin,
1966
Abelard, Peter. ‘Historia Calimatatum,’ in The Letters of Abelard and Heloise. Trans. Betty Radice. London, Penguin Books,
1974
Abū Ghudda, ‘Abd al-Fattāh (ed.). Arba‘ rasā’il fī ‘ulūm al-hadīth, 6th ed. Beirut, Maktab al-Matbū‘āt al-Islāmiyya, 1999
Abū Khaythama Zuhayr b. Harb. Kitāb al-‘ilm, ed. Muhammad Nāsir al-Dīn al-Albānī. Beirut, al-Maktab al-Islāmī, 1983
Abū Rayya, Mahmūd. Adwā’ ‘alā al-sunna al-muhammadiyya. Cairo, Dār al-Ta’līf, 1958
Acton, John Lord, A Lecture on the Study of History. London, MacMillan & Co., 1905
Al-Ahdal, ‘Abd al-Rahmān b. Sulaymān. Al-Nafas al-yamānī. Sanaa, Markaz al-Dirāsāt wa al-Abhāth al-Yamaniyya, 1979
Al-‘Ajlūnī, Ismā‘īl b. Ahmad. Kashf al-khafā’, ed. Ahmad al-Qalāsh. Cairo, Dār al-Turāth, [n.d.]
Al-‘Alā’ī, Salāh al-Dīn. Jāmi‘ al-tahsīl fī ahkām al-marāsīl, ed. Hamdī ‘Abd al-Majīd. Beirut, ‘Ālam al-Kutub, 2005
Al-Albānī, Muhammad Nāsir al-Dīn. Mukhtasar Sahīh al-Bukhārī. Riyadh, Maktabat al-Ma‘ārif, 2002
—— Adab al-zaffāf. Beirut, al-Maktab al-Islāmī, 1989
—— Da‘īf Sunan Ibn Mājah. Riyadh, Maktabat al-Ma‘ārif, 1998
—— Sahīh al-Jāmi‘ al-saghīr, ed. Zuhayr al-Shāwīsh. 3rd ed. Beirut, al-Maktab al-Islāmī, 1988
—— Sahīh al-Targhīb wa al-tarhīb. Riyadh, Maktabat al-Ma‘ārif, 2000
—— Silsilat al-ahādīth al-da‘īfa wa al-mawdū‘a, 2nd ed. Riyadh, Maktabat al-Ma‘ārif, 2000
—— Silsilat al-ahādīth al-sahīha, new ed. Riyadh, Maktabat al-Ma‘ārif, 1995
—— ‘Silsilat as’ilat Abī Ishāq al-Huwaynī li’l-shaykh Muhammad Nāsir al-Dīn al-Albānī,’ lecture from
www.islamway.com, last accessed 6/3/2004
—— ‘Tafsīr,’ lecture from www.islamway.com, last accessed 6/3/2004
—— ‘Tarjamat al-shaykh al-Albānī – Nash’at al-Shaykh fī Dimashq,’ lecture from www.islamway.com, last accessed
6/3/2004
—— ‘al-Zawāj,’ lecture from www.islamway.com, last accessed 6/3/2004
Al-Ash‘arī, Abū al-Hasan. Maqālāt al-islāmiyyīn, ed. Helmut Ritter. Istanbul, Dar al-Funūn, [1928]
Al-‘Askarī, Abū Hilāl. Kitab al-awā’il, ed. Walīd Qassāb. Riyadh, Dār al-‘Ulūm, 1981
Al-Baghawī, al-Husayn b. Mas‘ūd. Masābīh al-sunna. Beirut, Dār al- Qalam, [197–]
Al-Barbahārī, Abū Muhammad. Sharh al-sunna, ed. Khālid al-Raddādī. Beirut, Dār al-Sumay‘ī, 2000
Al-Bayjūrī, Burhān al-Dīn Ibrāhīm. Hāshiyat al-imām al-Bayjūrī ‘alā Jawharat al-tawhīd, ed. ‘Alī Jum‘a. Cairo, Dār al-
Salām, 2006
Al-Buhūtī, Mansūr. Al-Rawd al-murbi‘, ed. Bashīr Muhammad ‘Uyūn. Damascus, Maktabat Dār al-Bayān, 1999
Al-Bukhārī, Muhammad b. Ismā‘īl. Kitāb al-du‘afā’ al-saghīr, ed. Muhammad Zāyid. Beirut, Dār al-Ma‘rifa, 1986
—— Sahīh al-Bukhārī. Cited by chapter, subchapter system
—— Al-Tārīkh al-awsat, ed. Muhammad al-Luhaydān. Riyadh, Dār al-Sumay‘ī, 1998
Cicero, Marcus. The Nature of the Gods (De Natura Deorum), trans. Horace McGregor. New York, Penguin, 1967
Al-Dārimī, ‘Abdallāh b. ‘Abd al-Rahmān. Al-Sunan. Cited according to chapter, subchapter system
Al-Dhahabī, Shams al-Dīn. Mīzān al-i‘tidāl fī naqd al-rijāl, ed. ‘Alī Muhammad al-Bijāwī. [Beirut], Dār Ihyā’ al-Kutub
al-‘Arabiyya, n.d. Reprint of the Cairo edition published by ‘Īsā al-Bābī al-Halabī, 1963–4
—— Siyar a‘lām al-nubalā’, ed. Shu‘ayb al-Arnā’ūt et al. Beirut, Mu’assasat al-Risāla, 1992–1998
—— Tadhkirat al-huffāz, ed. Zakariyyā ‘Umayrāt. Beirut, Dār al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, 1998
Al-Dimashqī, Abū Zur‘a. Tārīkh Abī Zur‘a al-Dimashqī, ed. Khālid Mansūr. Beirut, Dār al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, 1996
Al-Fadlī, ‘Abd al-Hādī and al-Shahīd al-Thānī. Introduction to Hadīth, including Dirāyat al-Hadīth, trans. Nazmina Virjee.
London, Islamic College for Advanced Studies, 2002
Al-Fārisī, ‘Abd al-Ghāfir. Tārīkh Naysābūr, ed. Muhammad Kāzim al-Hamūdī. Qum, Jamā‘at al-Mudarrisīn, 1983
Al-Ghazālī, Abū Hāmid. Ihyā’ ‘ulūm al-dīn, ed. Muhammad Wahbī Sulaymān and Usāma ‘Ammūra, 5 vols. Damascus, Dār
al-Fikr, 2006
—— Al-Iqtisād fī al-i‘tiqād. Cairo, Mustafā al-Bābī al-Halabī, n.d.
—— Al-Mankhūl min ta‘līqāt al-usūl, ed. Muhammad Hasan Hītū. [Damascus], n.p., [1970]

 Al-Ghazālī, Muhammad. Al-Sunna al-nabawiyya bayn ahl al-fiqh wa ahl al-hadīth, 13th ed. Cairo, Dār al-Shurūq, 2005
—— Turāthunā al-fikrī, 8th ed. Cairo, Dār al-Shurūq, 2003
Al-Ghumārī, ‘Abdallāh. Itqān al-san‘a fī tahqīq ma‘nā al-bid‘a, ed. ‘Abdallāh al-Minshāwī. Cairo, Maktabat al-Qāhira, 2005
—— Al-Khawātir al-dīniyya. Cairo, Maktabat al-Qāhira, 2004
——Tawjīh al-‘ināya li-ta‘rīf ‘ilm al-hadīth riwāya wa dirāya, ed. Safwat Jawda Ahmad. Cairo, Maktabat al-Qāhira, 2002
Al-Ghumārī, Ahmad. Al-Burhān al-jalī fī tahqīq intisāb al-sūfiyya ilā ‘Alī, ed. Ahmad Mursī. Cairo, Maktabat al-Qāhira,
[n.d.]
—— Dar’ al-da‘f ‘an hadīth man ‘ashiqa fa-‘aff, ed. ‘Iyād al-Ghawj. Cairo, Dār al-Imām al-Tirmidhī, 1996
—— Ibrāz al-wahm al-maknūn min kalām Ibn Khaldūn. Damascus, Maktabat al-Taraqqī, 1928
—— Ju’nat al-attār fī taraf al-fawā’id wa nawādir al-akhbār (n.p., n.d.)
—— Al-Mudāwī li-‘ilal al-Jāmi‘ al-saghīr wa sharhayy al-Munāwī. Egypt, Dār al-Kutub, 1996
Gibbon, Edward. The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. New York, The Modern Library, n.d.
Hammām b. Munabbih. Sahīfat Hammām b. Munabbih, ed. Rif‘at Fawzī ‘Abd al-Muttalib. Cairo, Maktabat al-Khānjī, 1985
Al-Hārūnī, Ahmad b. al-Husayn. Al-Amālī al-sughrā, ed. ‘Abd al-Salām al-Wajīh. Sa‘da, Yemen, Dār al-Turāth al-Islāmī, 1993
Haykal, Muhammad Husayn. Hayāt Muhammad, 10th ed. Cairo, Dār al-Ma‘ārif, 1969
Herodotus. The Histories, trans. Aubrey De Sélincourt. London, Penguin Books, 1996
Hujvīrī, ‘Alī. Kashf al-mahjūb. Tehran, Ketābkhāne-ye Tūrī, 1979
Al-Humaydī, Abdallāh b. al-Zubayr. Al-Musnad, ed. Habīb al-Rahmān al-A‘zamī. Karachi, al-Majlis al-‘Ilmī, 1963
Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr, Yūsuf. Jāmi‘ bayān al-‘ilm wa fadlihi, ed. ‘Abd al-Rahmān Muhammad ‘Uthmān. Medina, al-Maktaba al-
Salafiyya, [1968]
—— Kitāb al-Tamhīd, ed. Mustafā al-‘Alawī and Muhammad al-Bakrī. [Rabat], Wizārat ‘Umūm al-Awqāf, 1982
Ibn Abī al-‘Izz al-Hanafī, Muhammad. Sharh al-‘Aqīda al-Tahāwiyya, ed. Muhammad Nāsir al-Dīn al-Albānī. Amman, al-Dār
al-Islāmī, 1998
Ibn Abī Ya‘lā al-Hanbalī. Tabaqāt al-hanābila, ed. ‘Alī Muhammad ‘Umar. Cairo, Maktabat al-Thaqāfa al-Dīniyya, 1998
Ibn ‘Adī, ‘Abdallāh. Al-Kāmil fī du‘afā’ al-rijāl. Beirut, Dār al-Fikr, 1985
Ibn ‘Aqīl, Muhammad. Al-‘Atb al-jamīl ‘alā ahl al-jarh wa al-ta‘dīl, ed. Hasan al-Saqqāf. Amman, Dār al-Imām al-Nawawī,
2004
Ibn ‘Asākir, ‘Alī b. Hasan. Tārīkh madīnat Dimashq, ed. ‘Umar al-‘Amrawī. Beirut, Dār al-Fikr, 1995–1997
Ibn Bābawayh, Muhammad b. ‘Alī. Amālī al-Sadūq, ed. Muhammad Mahdi al-Musawī. Najaf, al-Matba‘a al-Haydariyya, 1970
—— Man lā yahduruhu al-faqīh, ed. Muhammad Ja‘far Shams al-Din. Beirut, Dar al-Ta‘āruf li’l-Matbū‘āt, 1994
Ibn Battāl, ‘Alī b. Khalaf. Sharh Sahīh al-Bukhārī, ed. Ibrāhīm Yāsir Ibrāhīm. Riyadh, Maktabat al-Rushd, 2003
Ibn al-Farrā, Abū Ya‘lā. Al-‘Udda fī usūl al-fiqh, ed. Ahmad Sīr al-Mubārak. Beirut, Mu’assasat al-Risāla, 1980
Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalānī. Fath al-bārī sharh Sahīh al-Bukhārī, ed. ‘Abd al-‘Azīz b. Bāz and Ayman Fu’ād ‘Abd al-Bāqī.
Beirut, Dār al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, 1997
—— Huda al-sārī, ed. Ayman Fu’ād ‘Abd al-Bāqī and ‘Abd al-‘Azīz b. Bāz. Beirut, Dār al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, 1997
—— Hidāyat al-ruwāt ilā takhrīj ahādīth al-Misbāh wa’l-Mishkāt, ed. Muhammad Nāsir al-Dīn al-Albānī. Dammam, Dār
Ibn al-Qayyim, 2001
—— Al-Matālib al-‘āliya fī zawā’id al-masānīd al-thamāniya, ed. Habīb al-Rahmān al-A‘zamī. Kuwait, Wizārat al-Awqāf,
1973
—— Al-Nukat ‘alā kitāb Ibn al-Salāh, ed. Mas‘ūd al-‘Adanī and Muhammad Fāris. Beirut, Dār al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, 1994
—— Talkhīs al-habīr. Cairo, Sharikat al-Tibā‘at al-Fanniyya, 1964
Ibn Hajar al-Haytamī, Ahmad b. Muhammad. Al-Fatāwā al-hadīthiyya, ed. Muhammad al-Mar‘ashlī. Beirut, Dār Ihyā’ al-
Turāth al-‘Arabī, 1998
Ibn Hanbal, Ahmad. Kitāb fadā’il al-sahāba, ed. Wasī Allāh Muhammad ‘Abbās. Beirut, Mu’assasat al-Risāla, 1983
—— Al-Musnad. Citations are to the standard Maymaniyya print of the book
Ibn Hibbān al-Bustī. Sahīh Ibn Hibbān, ed. Shu‘ayb al-Arnā’ūt and Husayn Asad. Beirut, Mu’assasat al-Risāla, 1984
Ibn al-Jawzī, ‘Abd al-Rahmān. Kitāb al-qussās wa al-mudhakkirīn, ed. Merlin S. Swartz. Beirut: Dar El-Machreq, 1986
—— Kitāb al-mawdū‘āt, ed. ‘Abd al-Rahmān ‘Uthmān. Medina, al-Maktaba al-Salafiyya, 1966–1968
—— Mashyakhat Ibn al-Jawzī, ed. Muhammad Mahfūz. Beirut, Dār al-Gharb al-Islāmī, 2006
—— Talbīs Iblīs. Cairo, Matba‘at Nahda, 1928
Ibn Khaldūn, ‘Abd al-Rahmān. The Muqaddimah: An Introduction to History. Trans. Franz Rosenthal. Ed. N.J. Dawood.
Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1967
Ibn Khuzayma, Muhammad b. Ishāq. Sahīh Ibn Khuzayma, ed. Muhammad Mustafā al-A‘zamī. Beirut, al-Maktab al-Islāmī,
[1970]
Ibn Ma‘īn, Yahyā. Kitāb al-‘ilal wa ma‘rifat al-rijāl, ed. Muhammad al-Jazā’irī. Beirut, Dār Ibn Hazm, 2004

 Ibn Mājah, Muhammad b. Yazīd. Sunan. Cited according to chapter, subchapter system
Ibn Manda, Muhammad b. Ishāq. Shurūt al-a’imma, ed. ‘Abd al-Rahmān al-Farīwā’ī. Riyadh, Dār al-Muslim, 1995
Ibn al-Mubrad, Yūsuf. Tahdhīb al-nafs li’l-‘ilm bi’l-‘ilm, ed. Adīb al-Kamdānī. [Damascus], [n.p.], 1995
Ibn al-Murtadā, Ahmad b. Yahyā. Tabaqāt al-mu‘tazila, ed. Suzanna Diwald-Wilzer. Beirut, Dār Maktabat al-Hayāt, [1980]
Ibn al-Nadīm. The Fihrist, ed. and trans. Bayard Dodge. New York, Columbia University Press, 1970; Chicago, Kazi
Publications, 1998
Ibn Nuqta, Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Ghanī. Kitab al-Taqyīd li-ma‘rifat ruwāt al-sunan wa al-masānīd, ed. Kamāl Yūsuf al-
Hūt. Beirut, Dār al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, 1988
Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya. I‘lām al-muwaqqi‘īn, ed. Tāhā ‘Abd al-Ra’ūf Sa‘d. Beirut, Dār al-Jīl, 1973
—— Kitāb al-rūh, ed. ‘Ārif al-Hājj. Beirut, Dār Ihyā’ al-‘Ulūm, 1988
Ibn Qutayba al-Dīnawarī. Ta’wīl mukhtalif al-hadīth, ed. Muhammad Zuhrī al-Najjār. Beirut, Dār al-Jīl, 1973
Ibn Sa‘d, Muhammad. Al-Tabaqāt al-kubrā. Beirut, Dār Sādir, [1968]
Ibn al-Salāh, Abu ‘Amr ‘Uthmān. Muqaddimat Ibn al-Salāh, ed. ‘Ā’isha ‘Abd al-Rahmān. Cairo, Dār al-Ma‘ārif, 1990
Ibn Taymiyya, Taqī al-Dīn. Majmū‘at al-fatāwā, ed. Sayyid Husayn al-‘Affānī and Khayrī Sa‘īd. Cairo, al-Maktaba al-
Tawfīqiyya, [n.d.]
Ibn al-Wazīr, Muhammad. Kitāb tanqīh al-anzār fī ma‘rifat ‘ulūm al-āthār, ed. Muhammad Subhī Hallāq. Beirut, Dār Ibn
Hazm, 1999
Al-‘Irāqī, Zayn al-Dīn ‘Abd al-Rahīm. Al-Bā‘ith ‘alā al-khalās min hawādith al-qussās, ed. Muhammad Lutfī al-Sabbāgh.
Damascus, Dār al-Warrāq, 2001
—— Al-Taqyīd wa al-īdāh, ed. Muhammad ‘Abbās Shāhīn. Beirut, Dār al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, 1999
Al-Isbahānī, Abū Nu‘aym. Dhikr akhbār Isbahān, ed. Sayyid Khusrawī Hasan. Beirut, Dār al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, 1990
—— Hilyat al-awliyā’ wa tabaqāt al-asfiyā’. Beirut, Dār al-Fikr, 2006
Al-Ishbīlī, Muhammad b. Khayr. Fahrasat mā rawāhu ‘an shuyūkhihi min al-dawāwīn al-musannafa fī durūb al-‘ilm wa
anwā‘ al-ma‘ārif. Beirut, al-Maktab al-Tijārī, 1963
Al-Jāhiz, Abū ‘Uthmān. Rasā’il al-Jāhiz, ed. ‘Abd al-Salām Muhammad Hārūn. Cairo, Maktabat al-Khānjī, 1964
Al-Jassās, Abū Bakr. Ahkām al-Qur’ān, ed. Muhammad Qamhāwī. 5 vols. Beirut, Dār Ihyā’ al-Turāth al-‘Arabī, 1985
—— Usūl al-Jassās, ed. Muhammad Tāhir. Beirut, Dār al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, 2000
Al-Jawzaqānī, al-Husayn b. Ibrāhīm. Al-Abātīl wa al-manākīr wa al-sihāh wa al-mashāhīr, ed. Muhammad Hasan
Muhammad. Beirut, Dār al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, 2001
Al-Jazā’irī, Tāhir. Tawjīh al-nazar ilā usūl al-athar, ed. ‘Abd al-Fattāh Abū Ghudda. Aleppo, Maktabat al-Matbū‘āt al-
Islāmiyya, 1995
Jum‘a, ‘Alī. Al-Bayān li-mā yushghalu bihi al-adhhān. Cairo, Muqattam, 2005
Al-Juwaynī, Imām al-Haramayn. Ghiyāth al-umam fī tiyāth al-zulam. Ed. Mustafā Hilmī and Fu’ād ‘Abd al-Mun‘im.
Alexandria, Dār al-Da‘wa, 1400/1980
Al-Kawtharī, Muhammad Zāhid. Maqālāt al-Kawtharī. Cairo, al-Maktaba al-Azhariyya, 1994
Al-Khalīlī, al-Khalīl b. ‘Abdallāh. Al-Irshād fī ma‘rifat ‘ulamā’ al-hadīth, ed. ‘Āmir Ahmad Haydar. Mecca, Dār al-Fikr, 1993
Al-Khatīb al-Baghdādī. Jāmi‘ akhlāq al-rāwī wa ādāb al-sāmi‘, ed. Muhammad Sa‘īd. Mansoura, Egypt, Dār al-Wafā’, 2002
—— Al-Kifaya fī ma‘rifat usūl ‘ilm al-riwāya, ed. Abū Ishāq Ibrāhīm al-Dimyātī. Cairo, Dār al-Hudā, 2003
—— ‘Nasīhat li-ahl al-hadīth.’ In Majmū‘at al-rasā’il fī ‘ulūm al-hadīth, ed. Nasr Abū ‘Atāyā, pp. 111–126. Mansoura,
Egypt; Dār al-Khānī, 1994
—— Taqyīd al-‘ilm, ed. Yūsuf al-‘Ishsh. Aleppo, Dār al-Wa‘ī, [n.d.]
—— Tārīkh Baghdād, ed. Mustafā ‘Abd al-Qādir ‘Atā. Beirut, Dār al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, 1997
Al-Khattābī, Hamd. Ma‘ālim al-sunan, 2nd ed. Beirut, al-Maktaba al-‘Ilmiyya, 1981
Al-Kulaynī, Muhammad b. Ya‘qūb. Al-Kāfī, trans. Muhammad Hasan al-Rizvani. Karachi, Islamic Research Center, 1995
—— Al-Usūl al-kāfī, ed. Muhammad Ja‘far Shams al-Dīn. Beirut, Dār al-Ta‘āruf li’l-Matbū‘āt, 1998
Livy, Titus. The Early History of Rome. London, Penguin Books, 1960
Mālik b. Anas. Muwatta’. Cited according to the chapter, subchapter system
Al-Maqdisī, Ibn Qudāma. Al-Mughnī, ed. ‘Abd al-Fattāh al-Hulw and ‘Abdallāh al-Turkī. Cairo, Hujr, 1986–1990
Al-Miswarī, Ahmad b. Sa‘d al-Dīn. Al-Risāla al-munqidha min al-ghiwāya fī turuq al-riwāya, ed. Hamūd al-Ahnūmī.
Sana’a, Maktabat Badr, 1997
Al-Munāwī, ‘Abd al-Ra’ūf. Fayd al-qadīr sharh al-Jāmi‘ al-saghīr. Mecca: Maktabat Nizār Mustafā al-Bāz, 1998
—— Al-Jāmi‘ al-azhar min hadīth al-nabī al-anwar. Cairo, al-Markaz al-‘Arabī li’l-Bahth wa al-Nashr, 1980
Al-Mundhirī, ‘Abd al-‘Azīm. Jawāb al-hāfiz Abī Muhammad ‘Abd al-‘Azīm al-Mundhirī‘an asi’la fī al-jarh wa’l-ta‘dīl, ed.
‘Abd al-Fattāh Abū Ghudda. Beirut, Maktabat al-Matbū‘āt al-Islāmiyya, 1990
Muslim b. al-Hajjāj. Kitāb al-tamyīz, ed. Muhammad al-A‘zamī. Riyadh, Matba‘at Jāmi‘at Riyād, [1975]

 —— Sahīh Muslim. Cited according to the chapter, subchapter system
Al-Najāshī, Ahmad b. ‘Alī. Rijāl al-Najāshī, ed. Muhammad Jawād al-Nā’īnī. Beirut, Dār al-Adwā’, 1988
Al-Nasā’ī, Ahmad b. Shu‘ayb. Sunan. Cited according to the chapter, subchapter system
Al-Nawawī, Muhyī al-Dīn. Al-Adhkār al-muntakhab min sayyid al-abrār. Cairo, Dār al-Manār, 1999
—— Sharh Sahīh Muslim. Beirut, Dār al-Qalam, 1987
Al-Naysābūrī, al-Hākim. Kitāb al-madkhal ilā ma‘rifat kitāb al-iklīl, ed. Ahmad b. Fāris al-Sulūm. Beirut, Dār Ibn Hazm,
2003
—— Al-Mustadrak. Hyderabad, Dā’irat al-Ma‘ārif al-‘Uthmāniyya, 1917–1925
Petrarch, Francesco. The Secret, trans. William H. Draper. London: Chatto & Windus, 1911
Polybius. The Histories, trans. Mortimer Chambers. New York, Washington Square Press, 1966
Al-Qābisī, ‘Alī b. Muhammad. Muwatta’ al-imām Mālik, ed. Muhammad b. ‘Alawī al-Mālikī. Abu Dhabi, al-Majma‘ al-
Thaqāfī, 2004
Al-Qādī ‘Iyād b. Mūsā. Kitāb al-shifā bi-ta‘rīf huqūq al-mustafā. Beirut, Dār Ibn Hazm, 2002
Al-Qaradāwī, Yūsuf. Kayfa nata‘āmalu ma‘a al-sunna al-nabawiyya. Herdon, VA, International Institute for Islamic
Thought, 1990
Qārī, Mullā ‘Alī. Al-Asrār al-marfū‘a fī al-akhbār al-mawdū‘a, ed. Muhammad Lutfī Sabbāgh. Beirut, al-Maktab al-Islāmī,
1986
—— Al-Masnū‘ fī ma‘rifat al-hadīth al-mawdū‘, ed. ‘Abd al-Fattāh Abū Ghudda. Beirut, Dār al-Bashā’ir al-Islāmiyya, 2005
Qazvīnī, Nāsir al-Dīn. Ketāb-e naqd-e ma‘refat beh ba‘d-e mathāleb al-navāseb fī naqd ba‘d fadā’eh al-ravāfed, ed. Jalāl
al-Dīn Hosaynī Ormavī. [Tehran], Chāp-khāne-ye Sepehr, [1952]
Al-Qurtubī, Muhammad b. Ahmad. Al-Jāmi‘ li-ahkām al-Qur’ān, ed. Muhammad Ibrāhīm al-Hifnāwī and Mahmūd Hāmid
‘Uthmān. 20 vols in 10. Cairo, Dār al-Hadīth, 1994
Al-Rāfi‘ī, Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Karīm. Al-Tadwīn fī akhbār Qazwīn, ed. ‘Azīz Allāh al-‘Utāridī. Beirut, Dār al-Kutub
al-‘Ilmiyya, 1987
Al-Rāzī, Abū Zur‘a. Abū Zur‘a al-Rāzī wa juhūduhu fī al-sunna al-nabawiyya ma‘a tahqīq kitābihi al-Du‘afā’ wa
ajwibatihi ‘alā as’ilat al-Bardha‘ī, ed. Sa‘dī al-Hāshimī. Medina, Cairo, Dār al-Wafā’ and Maktabat Ibn al-Qayyim, 1989
Al-Rāzī, Ibn Abī Hātim. ‘Ilal al-hadīth. Beirut, Dār al-Ma‘rifa, 1985
—— Al-Jarh wa al-ta‘dīl. Hyderabad, Dā’irat al-Ma‘ārif al-‘Uthmāniyya, 1952–1953
—— Al-Taqdima. Hyderabad, Dā’irat al-Ma‘ārif al-‘Uthmāniyya, 1952
Ridā, Muhammad Rashīd. Al-Manār (journal)
Al-Sa‘d, ‘Abdallāh. ‘Sharh Kitāb al-Tamyīz,’ lecture from www.islamway.com, last accessed 6/3/2004
—— ‘Sharh al-Mūqiza,’ lecture from www.islamway.com, last accessed 6/3/2004
Al-Sakhāwī, Shams al-Dīn. Fath al-mughīth, ed. ‘Alī Husayn ‘Alī. Cairo, Maktabat al-Sunna, 2003
—— Al-Maqāsid al-hasana, ed. Muhammad Khisht. Beirut: Dār al-Kitāb al-‘Arabī, 2004
Al-Sam‘ānī, Abū Sa‘d. Adab al-imlā’ wa al-istimlā’. Beirut, Dār al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, 1981
Al-San‘ānī, ‘Abd al-Razzāq. Musannaf, ed. Habīb al-Rahmān al-A‘zamī. Beirut, al-Maktab al-Islāmī, 1983
Al-San‘ānī, Muhammad b. Ismā‘īl. Dīwān al-Amīr al-San‘ānī. Beirut, Manshūrāt al-Madīna, 1986
—— Irshād al-nuqqād ilā taysīr al-ijtihād, ed. Muhammad Subhī Hasan. Beirut, Mu’assasat al-Rayyān, 1992
—— [Question and Answer], Ms. Majāmī‘ 1, Dār al-Awqāf, Sana’a
Al-Sarakhsī, Muhammad b. Ahmad. Usūl al-Sarakhsī, ed. Abū al-Wafā’ al-Afghānī. Beirut, Dār al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, 1993
Al-Sarraj, Abū Nasr. The Kitáb al-Luma‘ fi’l-Tas.awwuf, ed. Reynold Nicholson. London, Luzac & Co., 1963
Sāwī, Ahmad b. Muhammad. Hāshiyat al-Sāwī ‘alā Tafsīr al-Jalālayn, ed. ‘Alī Muhammad al-Dabbā‘. Bombay, Surtis Sons,
[1981]
Al-Shāfi‘ī, Muhammad b. Idrīs. Al-Risāla, ed. Ahmad Shākir. Beirut, al-Maktaba al-‘Ilmiyya, [n.d.]
—— Al-Umm. Cairo, Dār al-Sha‘b, 1968
Shaltūt, Mahmūd. Al-Fatāwā. Cairo, Dār al-Shurūq, 1983
Al-Sha‘rānī, ‘Abd al-Wahhāb. Al-Mīzān al-kubrā. Cairo, Maktabat Zahrān, [n.d.]
—— Al-Tabaqāt al-kubrā / Lawāmih al-anwār fī tabaqāt al-akhyār, ed. Sulaymān al-Sālih. Beirut, Dār al-Ma‘rifa, 2005
Al-Sijistānī, Abū Dāwūd. ‘Risālat al-imām Abī Dāwūd al-Sijistānī ilā ahl Makka fī wasf Sunanihi.’ In Thalāth rasā’il fī ‘ilm
mustalah al-hadīth, ed. ‘Abd al-Fattāh Abū Ghudda, pp. 27–54. Aleppo, Maktab al-Matbū‘āt al-Islāmiyya, 1997
—— Al-Sunan. Cited according to chapter, subchapter system
Spinoza, Benedict. Theological-Political Treatise, trans. Michael
Silverthorne and Jonathan Israel. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007
Al-Subkī, Tāj al-Dīn. Tabaqāt al-shāfi‘iyya al-kubrā, ed. Mahmūd Muhammad al-Tanāhī and ‘Abd al-Fattāh Muhammad al-
Hulw. [Cairo], ‘Īsā al-Bābī al-Halabī, 1964

 —— Al-Sayf al-saqīl fī al-radd ‘alā ibn al-Zafīl, eds. Muhammad Zāhid al-Kawtharī and ‘Abd al-Hafīz ‘Atiyya. [Cairo],
Matba‘at al-Sa‘āda, 1937
Al-Suhrawardī, ‘Umar b. Muhammad. ‘Awārif al-ma‘ārif, ed. Adīb al-Kamdānī and Muhammad al-Mustafā. Mecca, al-
Maktaba al-Makkiyya, 2001
Al-Sulamī, Abū ‘Abd al-Rahmān. Kitāb al-arba‘īn fī al-tasawwuf. Hyderabad, Dā’irat al-Ma‘ārif al-‘Uthmāniyya, 1950
—— Tabaqāt al-sūfiyya, ed. Nūr al-Dīn Shurayba. Cairo, Maktabat al-Khānjī, 1997
Al-Suyūtī, Jalāl al-Dīn. Al-Azhār al-mutanāthira fī al-ahādīth al- mutawātira, ed. ‘Abd al-‘Azīz al-Ghumārī. Cairo, Dār al-
Ta’līf, [n.d.]
—— Al-Hāwī li’l-fatāwī, 2nd ed. Beirut, Dār al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, 1975
—— Jam‘ al-jawāmi‘ al-ma‘rūf bi’l-Jāmi‘ al-kabīr. [Cairo], Majma‘ al-Buhūth al-Islāmiyya, 1970
—— Al-Jāmi‘ al-saghīr. Beirut, Dār al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, 2004
—— Al-La’ālī’ al-masnū‘a fī al-ahādīth al-mawdū‘a, ed. Sālih b. Muhammad b. ‘Uwayda. Beirut, Dār al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya,
1996
—— Al-Khasā’is al-kubrā. Beirut, Dār al-Kitāb al-‘Arabī, n.d.
—— ‘al-Ta‘zīm wa al-manna fī anna abawayh rasūl Allāh fī al-janna.’ In Silsilat matbū‘āt Dā’irat al-Ma‘ārif
al-‘Uthmāniyya, 50, 1915, pp. 1–46
—— Nazm al-‘iqyān fī a‘yān al-a‘yān, ed. Philip Hitti. Beirut, al-Maktaba al-‘Ilmiyya, 1927
Al-Tabarānī, Abū al-Qāsim. Al-Mu‘jam al-saghīr, ed. ‘Abd al-Rahmān Muhammad ‘Uthmān. Beirut, Dār al-Fikr, 1981
Al-Tabrīzī, Muhammad al-Khatīb. Miskhat al-Masabih, trans. James Robson. Lahore, Sh. Muhammad Ashraf, 1963
Al-Tirmidhī, Muhammad b. ‘Īsā. Al-Jāmi‘. Cited according to the chapter, subchapter system
Al-Tūfī, Najm al-Dīn. Risāla fī ri‘āyat al-maslaha, ed. Ahmad ‘Abd al-Rahīm al-Sāyih. Cairo, al-Dār al-Misriyya al-
Lubnāniyya, 1993
Al-‘Uqaylī, Abū Ja‘far. Kitāb al-du‘afā’ al-kabīr, ed. ‘Abd al-Mu‘tī Qal‘ajī. Beirut, Dār al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, 1984
Voltaire. La Philosophie de l’Histoire. Utrecht, n.p., 1765
Al-Wādi‘ī, Muqbil bin Hādī. Majmū‘ fatāwā al-Wādi‘ī, ed. Sādiq al- Baydānī. n.p., 2005
—— Al-Makhraj min al-fitna, 3rd ed. Sa‘da, Maktabat San‘ā’ al-Athariyya, 2002
Al-Wā’ilī, Abū Nasr. Risālat al-Sijzī ilā ahl Zabīd fī al-radd ‘alā man ankara al-harf wa al-sawt, ed. Muhammad b. Karīm
b. ‘Abdallāh. Riyadh, Dār al-Rāya, 1994
Al-Wāsitī, Aslam b. Sahl Bahshal. Tārīkh Wāsit, ed. Kūrkīs ‘Awwād. Baghdad, Matba‘at al-Ma‘ārif, 1967
Al-Wazīrī, Sārim al-Dīn Ibrāhīm. Al-Falak al-dawwār fī ‘ulūm al-hadīth wa al-fiqh wa al-āthār, ed. Muhamad Yahyā
‘Azzān. Sa‘da, Dār al-Turāth al-Yamanī, 1994
Wolf, Friedrich August. Prolegomena to Homer, ed. and trans. Anthony Grafton, Glenn W. Most and James E.G. Zetzel.
Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1985
Al-Zarkashī, Badr al-Dīn Muhammad. Al-Bahr al-muhīt fī usūl al-fiqh, ed. Muhammad Muhammad Tāmir. Beirut, Dār al-
Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, 2007
—— Al-Tadhkira fī al-ahādīth al-mushtahira, ed. Mustafā ‘Abd al-Qādir ‘Atā. Beirut, Dār al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, 1406/1986
Zayd b. ‘Alī. Musnad Zayd b. ‘Alī. Beirut, Dār Maktabat al-Hayāt, 1966
Al-Zayla‘ī, Jamāl al-Dīn. Nasb al-rāya li-ahādīth al-Hidāya, ed. Muhammad ‘Awwāma. Jeddah, Mu’assasat al-Rayyān,
1997
SECONDARY SOURCES
Abbott, Nabia. Studies in Arabic Literary Papyri II: Qur’ānic Commentary and Tradition. Chicago, University of Chicago
Press, 1967
Abd al-Rauf, Muhammad. ‘Íadīth Literature – I: The Development of the Science of H.adīth,’ in The Cambridge History of
Arabic Literature: Arabic Literature until the End of the Umayyad Period, eds. A.F.L. Beeston et al., pp. 271–288.
London, Cambridge University Press, 1983
Abū Zahra, Muhammad. Abū Hanīfa. Cairo, Dār al-Fikr al-‘Arabī, 1965
—— Ibn Hanbal. Cairo, Dār al-Fikr al-‘Arabī, [1965]
—— Ibn Taymiyya. Cairo, Dār al-Fikr al-‘Arabī, 1964
—— Mālik. Cairo, Dār al-Fikr al-‘Arabī, 2002
—— Al-Shāfi‘ī. Cairo, Dār al-Fikr al-‘Arabī, 1996
Ahmad, Aziz. Islamic Modernism in India and Pakistan. London, Oxford University Press, 1967
—— and G.E. von Grunebaum, eds. Muslim Self-Statement in India and Pakistan 1857–1968. Wiesbaden, Otto
Harrassovitz, 1970

 Amir-Moezzi, Mohammed Ali. The Divine Guide in Early Shi’ism. Trans. David Streight. Albany, SUNY Press, 1994
Anjum, Ovamir. Politics, Law, and Community in Islamic Thought. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2012
Al-‘Awd, Sahl. Al-Mu‘īn ‘alā ma‘rifat kutub al-arba‘īn. Beirut, ‘Ālam al-Kutub, 2005
‘Awwāma, Muhammad. Athar al-hadīth al-sharīf fī ikhtilāf al-a’imma al-fuqahā’, 2nd ed. Cairo, Dār al-Salām, 1987
Azami, Muhammad. Studies in Early H.adīth Literature. Kuala Lumpur, Islamic Book Trust, 2000
Al-‘Azzān, Muhammad Yahyā. Al-Sahāba ‘ind al-zaydiyya. Sana’a, Markaz al-Turāth, 2004
Benjaminson, Peter and David Anderson. Investigative Reporting, 2nd ed. Ames, Iowa, Iowa State University Press, 1990
Bentley, Jerry. Humanists and Holy Writ. Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1983
Brooke, Rosalind and Christopher. Popular Religion in the Middle Ages: Western Europe 1000–1300. New York, Barnes
and Noble, 1984
Brown, Daniel. Rethinking Tradition in Modern Islamic Thought. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1996
Brown, Jonathan A.C. The Canonization of al-Bukhārī and Muslim. Leiden, Brill, 2007
—— ‘Critical Rigor versus Juridical Pragmatism: How Legal Theorists and H.adīth Scholars Approached the Backgrowth of
Isnāds in the Genre of ‘Ilal al-H.adīth,’ Islamic Law and Society 14, no. 1, 2007, pp. 1–41
—— ‘A Man for All Seasons: Ibn ‘Uqda and Crossing Sectarian Boundaries in the Fourth/Tenth Century,’ Al-’Usul al-Wusta
24, 2016, pp. 139–144
—— ‘How We Know Early H.adīth Critics Did Matn Criticism and Why It’s So Hard to Find.’ Islamic Law and Society 15,
2008, pp. 143–184
—— ‘The Last Days of al-Ghazzālī and the Tripartite Division of the Sufi World,’ The Muslim World 96, 2006, pp. 89–113
—— ‘The Rules of Matn Criticism: There Are No Rules.’ Islamic Law and Society 19, 2012, pp. 356–396
Brumfitt, J.H. Voltaire, Historian. Oxford, Oxford U. Press, 1958
Buckley, Ron. ‘On the Origins of Shī‘i Hadīth.’ Muslim World, 88, no. 2, 1998, pp. 165–184
Burton, John. An Introduction to the Hadith. Edinburgh, Edinburgh University Press, 1994
Buzpinar, Tufan. ‘Opposition to the Ottoman Caliphate in the Early Years of Abdülhamid II: 1877–1882,’ Die Welt des Islams,
36, no. 1, 1996, pp. 59–89
Chittick, William. Imaginal Worlds: Ibn ‘Arabī and the Problem of Religious Diversity. Albany, SUNY Press, 1994
—— The Sufi Path of Knowledge. Albany, SUNY Press, 1989
Cook, Michael. Early Muslim Dogma: a Source-Critical Approach. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1981
—— ‘Eschatology and the Dating of Traditions,’ Princeton Papers in Near Eastern Studies 1, 1992, pp. 23–47
Crone, Patricia. Meccan Trade and the Rise of Islam. Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1987
—— Roman, Provincial and Islamic Law. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1987
Donner, Fred. ‘From Believers to Muslims: Confessional Self-identity in the Early Islamic Community,’ al-Abh.āth, 50–51,
2002–3, pp. 9–53
—— Muhammad and the Believers. Cambridge, MA, Belknap Press, 2010
—— Narratives of Islamic Origins. Princeton, Darwin Press, 1998
Ehrman, Bart D. The New Testament, 2nd ed. New York, Oxford University Press, 2000
Federspiel, Howard M. Sultans, Shamans and Saints. Honolulu, University of Hawai’i Press, 2007
Frampton, Travis. Spinoza and the Rise of Historical Criticism of the Bible. New York, T&T Clark, 2006
Frei, Hans. The Eclipse of Biblical Narrative. New Haven, Yale University Press, 1974
Gay, Peter, ed. Deism: An Anthology. Princeton, D. van Nostrand Co., 1968
Ghamidi, Javed Ahmad. Islam: A Comprehensive Introduction. Trans. Shehzad Saleem. Lahore, Al Mawrid, 2014
Gilmore, Myron P. Humanists and Jurists. Cambridge, MA, Belknap Press, 1963
Gleave, Robert. ‘Between Hadīth and Fiqh: The “Canonical” Imāmī Collections of Akhbār.’ Islamic Law and Society 8, no. 3,
2001, pp. 350–382
Goldziher, Ignaz. Introduction to Islamic Theology and Law, trans. Andras and Ruth Hamori. Princeton, Princeton University
Press, 1981
—— Muslim Studies II, trans. and ed. S.M. Stern and G.R. Barber. Chicago, Aldine Atherton, 1971
Hallaq, Wael. ‘On the Authoritativeness of Sunni Consensus,’ International Journal of Middle East Studies, 18, no. 4, 1986,
pp. 427–454
Halm, Heinz. Shi‘ism, trans. Janet Watson and Marian Hill. 2nd ed. New York, Columbia University Press, 2004
Hanioğlu, M. Şükrü. A Brief History of the Late Ottoman Empire. Princeton, Princeton University Press, 2008
Hassan, Mona. Longing for the Lost Caliphate. Princeton, Princeton University Press, 2016
Hodgson, Marshall. The Venture of Islam. Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1974
Howard, Thomas A. Religion and the Rise of Historicism. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2000
Ishaq, Muhammad. India’s Contribution to Hadith Literature. Dhaka, University of Dacca, 1955

 Al-‘Izzī, ‘Abdallāh Hamūd. ‘Ilm al-hadith ‘ind al-zaydiyya wa al-muhaddithīn. Sana’a, Mu’assasat al-Imām Zayd b. ‘Alī,
2001
Jum‘a, ‘Alī. Qawl al-sahābī ‘ind al-usūliyyīn. Cairo, Dār al-Risāla, 2004
Juynboll, G.H.A. The Authenticity of the Tradition Literature: Discussions in Modern Egypt. Leiden, Brill, 1969
—— Muslim Tradition: Studies in Chronology, Provenance and Authorship of Early H.adīth. London, Cambridge
University Press, 1983
—— ‘(Re)Appraisal of some Hadith Technical Terms,’ Islamic Law and Society, 8, no. 3, 2001, pp. 303–349
—— Studies on the Origins and Uses of Islamic H.adīth. Aldershot, Variorum, 1996
Karateke, Hakan and Maurus Reinkowski, eds. Legitimizing the Order: The Ottoman Rhetoric of State Power. Leiden, Brill,
2005
Kohlberg, Etan. A Medieval Muslim Scholar at Work. Leiden, Brill, 1992
—— ‘Shī‘ī Hadīth,’ in The Cambridge History of Arabic Literature: Arabic Literature until the End of the Umayyad
Period, eds Beeston, A.F.L.
et al. London, Cambridge University Press, 1983, pp. 299–307
—— ‘Al-Usūl al-Arba‘umi’a,’ Jerusalem Studies in Arabic and Islam, 10, 1987, pp. 128–166
Kramer, Martin. Islam Assembled: The Advent of the Muslim Congresses. New York, Columbia University Press, 1986
Krentz, Edgar. The Historical Critical Method. Philadelphia, Fortress Press, 1975
Al-Lahhām, Badī‘ al-Sayyid. Al-Imām al-hāfiz Jalāl al-Dīn al-Suyūtī wa juhūduhu fī al-hadīth wa ‘ulūmihi. Damascus,
Dār Qutayba, 1994
Lecker, Michael. ‘Biographical Notes on Ibn Shihāb al-Zuhrī,’ Journal of Semitic Studies, 41, 1996, pp. 21–63
Levtzion, Nehemia, ed. Conversion to Islam. New York, Holmes & Meier, 1979
Von Leyden, W. ‘Antiquity and Authority: A Paradox in the Renaissance Theory of History,’ Journal of the History of Ideas
19, no. 4, 1958, pp. 473–92
Lings, Martin. What is Sufism? Berkeley, University of California Press, 1975
Lucas, Scott. Constructive Critics: H.adīth Literature and the Articulation of Sunnī Islam. Leiden, Brill, 2004
Mahmūd, ‘Abd al-Majīd. Abū Ja‘far al-Tahāwī wa atharuhu fī al-hadīth. Cairo, al-Maktaba al-‘Arabiyya, 1975
Marchand, Suzanne L. German Orientalism in the Age of Empire. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2009
Massad, Joseph A. Islam in Liberalism. Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 2015
Melchert, Christopher. ‘The Musnad of Ah.mad Ibn H.anbal: How It Was Composed and What Distinguishes It from the Six
Books.’ Der Islam, 82, 2005, pp. 32–51
Mernissi, Fatema. Women and Islam: An Historical and Theological Enquiry, trans. Mary Joe Lakeland. Oxford, Basil
Blackwell, 1987
Modaressi, Hossein. Tradition and Survival: A Bibliographical Survey of Early Shī‘ite Literature, Vol. 1. Oxford,
Oneworld, 2003
Momigliano, Arnaldo. Studies in Historiography. London, Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1966
Morgan, Robert and John Barton. Biblical Interpretation. Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1988
Motzki, Harald. ‘Dating Muslim Traditions: a Survey,’ Arabica, 52, no. 2, 2005, pp. 204–253
—— ‘Der Fiqh des Zuhrī: die Quellenproblematik,’ Der Islam, 68, 1991, pp. 1–44
—— ‘The Murder of Ibn Abī Íuqayq.’ In The Biography of Muh.ammad, ed. Harald Motzki, pp. 170–239. Leiden, Brill, 2000
—— ‘The Mus.annaf of ‘Abd al-Razzāq al-S.an‘ānī as a Source of Authentic Ah.ādīth of the First Century A.H,’ Journal of
Near Eastern Studies, 50, 1991, pp. 1–21
—— ‘Quo vadis, Ḥ adīt-Forschung? Eine kritische Untersuchung von G.H.A. Juynboll: “Nāfi‘ the mawlā of Ibn ‘Umar, and
his position in Muslim Ḥ adīt Literature,” ’ Der Islam, 73, no. 1, 1996, pp. 40–80
Muir, William. The Life of Moh.ammad. Edinburgh, John Grant, 1923
Nakissa, Aria. ‘The Fiqh of Revolution and the Arab Spring: Secondary Segmentation as a Trend in Islamic Legal Doctrine,’
Muslim World, 105, 2015, pp. 398–421
Nurbakhsh, Javad. Traditions of the Prophet. New York, Khaniqahi-Nimatullahi Publications, 1981
Perrin, Norman. What Is Redaction Criticism? Philadelphia, Fortress Press, 1969
Powers, David S. ‘On Bequests in Early Islam,’ Journal of Near Eastern Studies, 48, no. 3, 1989, pp. 185–200
Rahman, Fazlur. Islamic Methodology in History. Karachi, Central Institute for Islamic Research, 1965
Randall, John Herman Jr. The School of Padua and the Emergence of Modern Science. Padua, Editrice Antenore, 1961
Reichmuth, Stefan. ‘MurtaÃā al-Zabīdī (d. 1791) in Biographical and Autobiographical Accounts: Glimpses of Islamic
Scholarship in the 18th Century,’ Die Welt des Islams, 39, no. 1, 1999, pp. 64–102
Rice, Eugene F. Jr. and Anthony Grafton. The Foundations of Early Modern Europe, 1460–1559. 2nd ed. New York, W.W.
Norton, 1994

 Rodenbeck, Max. Cairo: the City Victorious. Cairo, American University in Cairo Press, 1998
Safi, Omid, ed. Progressive Muslims. Oxford, Oneworld, 2003
Sanders, James A. Canon and Community. Philadelphia, Fortress Press, 1984
Sayeed, Asma. Women and the Transmission of Religious Knowledge in Islam. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press,
2015
Sayoud, Halim. ‘Author discrimination between the Holy Quran and the Prophet’s statements,’ Literary and Linguistic
Computing 27, no. 4, 2012, pp. 427–444
Schacht, Joseph. The Origins of Muhammadan Jurisprudence. Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1975
—— ‘A Revaluation of Islamic Tradition,’ Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1949, pp. 143–154
Scholder, Klaus. The Birth of Modern Critical Theology, trans. John Bowden. Philadelphia, Trinity Press, 1996
Sezgin, Fuat. Geschichte des arabischen Schrifttums. Leiden, Brill, 1967–2000
Stewart, Devin. ‘The Genesis of the Akhbārī Revival.’ In Safavid Iran and Her Neighbors, ed. Michel Mazzaoui, pp. 169–
189. Salt Lake City, University of Utah Press, 2003
Al-Tahāwī, Abū Ja‘far. The Creed of Imam al-Tahāwī, trans. Hamza Yusuf. N.p., Zaytuna Institute, 2007
Tokuno, Kyoko. ‘The Evaluation of Indigenous Scriptures in Chinese Buddhist Bibliographical Catalogues.’ In Chinese
Buddhist Apocrypha, ed. Robert Buswell, Jr., pp. 31–59. Honolulu, University of Hawaii Press, 1990
Trimingham, J. Spencer. The Sufi Orders in Islam. New York, Oxford University Press, 1971
Troeltsch, Ernst. ‘Historical and Dogmatic Method in Theology.’ In Religion in History, ed. and trans. James A. Luther and
Walter Bense. Minneapolis, Fortress Press, 1991
Troll, Christian W. Sayyid Ahmad Khan: A Reinterpretation of Muslim Theology. New Delhi, Vikas Press, 1978
Voll, John. ‘Two Biographies of Ahmad Ibn Idris al-Fasi (1760–1837),’ International Journal of African Historical Studies,
6, no. 3, 1973, pp. 633–645
Wadud, Amina. The Quran and Woman. New York, Oxford University Press, 1999
Wen Fong. ‘The Problem of Forgery in Chinese Painting: Part One,’ Artibus Asiae, 25, no. 2/3, 1962, pp. 95–110
Woods, John. The Aqquyunlu. Salt Lake City, University of Utah Press, 1999

 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
First of all, I must thank the editor of Oneworld’s Foundations of Islam series, Omid Safi,
whose generosity and good manners have improved my life immensely. I extend my gratitude to
all the friends and colleagues whom I bothered with this book. I sincerely thank Omar
Anchassi, Ovamir Anjum, Christopher Anzalone, Andrew Booso, Sarah Eltantawi, Alyssa
Gabbay, Andreas Görke, Najam Haider, Majid Khan, Suheil Laher, Mohammed Rustom,
Saleem Seedat, Justin Sterns, and Devin Stewart for reading the manuscript and providing me
with invaluable feedback. I am very grateful to my friends Garrett Davidson, Mohamed El-
Sharawi, Matthew Ingalls, and Scott Lucas, without whose insightful (and lengthy) discussions
I could not have covered much of the material in this book. Garrett Davidson deserves special
thanks for expanding my understanding of the isnād in later Islamic history. I am grateful to Drs.
Mark Goodacre of Duke University and Martin Jaffe for discussing biblical parallels of hadith
with me. I must also thank my students at the University of Washington and the esteemed UW
Historians Reading Group, who helped me work out the contents of this book. Generous
financial support for writing this book came from the Center for Arabic Study Abroad (CASA
II), the American Institute for Yemeni Studies, and the University of Washington.
As for my own contributions, I am entirely indebted to my teachers, particularly Fred Donner,
John Esposito, Maysam al-Faruqi, Musa Furber, ‘Alī Zayn al-‘Ābidīn al-Jifrī, ‘Alī Jum‘a,
Wadad al-Kadi, Haifaa Khalafallah, ‘Imād ‘Abbās Sa‘īd, Sayyid Shaltūt, Barbara Stowasser,
Tareq al-Suwaidan, and John Voll. The bulk of the credit goes to an exceptional scholar,
Osama al-Syed Mahmoud, who opened my eyes to the study of hadith. Although I know them
only through their books and recorded lectures, I must admit my inestimable debt to
Muhammad Abū Zahra, ‘Abdallāh al-Sa‘d, Muhammad Nāsir al-Dīn al-Albānī, ‘Abd al-Fattāh
Abū Ghudda and the two hadith masters of our age, Ahmad and ‘Abdallāh, the sons of al-
Siddīq al-Ghumārī, rahimahum Allāh. Of course, any failings in this book are my own
responsibility and no fault of those who instructed me.
I must also thank my wonderful family, especially my mother, Dr. Ellen Brown, who remains
a scholarly inspiration to me. My sisters Kate, Lucinda, and Senem, my aunt Kate and my
friends Asad Naqvi and Brenden Kerr require special thanks for keeping me sane and making
sure I dress decently.

 ILLUSTRATIONS
2.0   Leading Hadith Transmitters from the Companions
2.1   Transmission and Criticism of Hadiths from the Companions of the Prophet and Successors
2.2   Subchapter from ‘Abd al-Razzāq’s Musannaf
Concerning Ablutions
2.3   Musnad Organization
3.0   Types of Errors and Forgery in Hadiths
3.1   Generations of Sunni Hadith Critics
3.2   Corroboration
3.3   Rating of Hadiths and Their Uses among the Early and Later Hadith Critics
3.4   Hadith Prohibiting Putting on one’s Shoes while Standing: the Transmission of Abū Hurayra
3.5   Hadith Prohibiting Putting on one’s Shoes while Standing: the Transmission of Anas b. Mālik
3.6   Hadith Prohibiting Putting on one’s Shoes while Standing: the Transmission of Jābir b.
‘Abdallāh
3.7   Hadith Prohibiting Putting on one’s Shoes while Standing: the Transmission of Ibn ‘Umar
3.8a  Hadith 1 on the Qadarite Heresy: ‘Two types...’ – the Narration of Ibn ‘Abbās
3.8b  Hadith 1 on the Qadarite Heresy: Sundry Narrations
3.9   Hadith 2 on the Qadarite Heresy: ‘The Zoroastrians of my nation ...’
4.0   The Twelve Imams
4.1   Forms of Imami Shiite Hadiths
9.0   Schacht’s Common Link
9.1   Juynboll’s Common Link Theory
9.2   Cook’s Theory of Tadlīs and Spread of Isnāds
9.3   Isnād/Matn Analysis

 Oneworld Academic
 
An imprint of Oneworld Publications
 
First published by Oneworld Publications 2009
This ebook edition published 2017
 
This revised edition published by Oneworld Academic 2018
 
Copyright © Jonathan A. C. Brown 2009, 2018
 
The right of Jonathan A. C. Brown to be identified as the Author of this work has been asserted by him in accordance with the
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988
 
All rights reserved
Copyright under Berne Convention
A CIP record for this title is available
from the British Library
 
ISBN 978–1–78607–307–5
eISBN 978–1–78607–308–2
 
Typeset by Jayvee, Trivandrum, India
 
Oneworld Publications
10 Bloomsbury Street
London WC1B 3SR
England
 
 

 