THE PRESS IN THE 
MIDDLE EAST AND
NORTH AFRICA, 
1850−1950
Politics, Social History and Culture
Edited by ANTHONY GORMAN and DIDIER MONCIAUD
MODERN 
HADITH STUDIES
Continued Debates and New Approaches
Edited by BELAL ABU-ALABBAS, 
MICHAEL DANN and CHRISTOPHER MELCHERT

 
 modern hadith 
studies

 
 MODERN HADITH 
STUDIES
CONTINUING DEBATES AND 
NEW APPROACHES
rrr
EDITED BY BELAL ABU-ALABBAS, 
MICHAEL DANN AND 
CHRISTOPHER MELCHERT

 Edinburgh University Press is one of the leading university presses in the UK. We publish 
academic books and journals in our selected subject areas across the humanities and social 
sciences, combining cutting-edge scholarship with high editorial and production values 
to produce academic works of lasting importance. For more information visit our website: 
edinburghuniversitypress.com
© editorial matter and organisation Belal Abu-Alabbas, Michael Dann and 
Christopher Melchert, 2020
© the chapters their several authors, 2020
Edinburgh University Press Ltd
The Tun – Holyrood Road
12 (2f) Jackson’s Entry
Edinburgh EH8 8PJ
Typeset in KoufrUni by
Servis Filmsetting Ltd, Stockport, Cheshire,
and printed and bound in Great Britain
A CIP record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 978 1 4744 4179 7 (hardback)
ISBN 978 1 4744 4181 0 (webready PDF)
ISBN 978 1 4744 4182 7 (epub)
The right of the contributors to be identified as author of this work has been asserted in 
accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 and the Copyright and Related 
Rights Regulations 2003 (SI No. 2498).

 Contents
Figures and Tables 
vii
Acknowledgements 
viii
Note on Conventions 
ix
Notes on Contributors 
x
 
Introduction 
1
 
Christopher Melchert
1. Kunnā nakrahu al-kitāb: Scripture, Transmission of Knowledge, and 
Politics in the Second Century ah (719–816 ce) 
9
 
Pavel Pavlovitch
2. The History of the Adhān: a View from the Hadith Literature 
27
 
Maroussia Bednarkiewicz
3. Ibn al-Mubārak, Traditionist 
49
 
Christopher Melchert
4. Early ‘Traditionist Sufis’: A Network Analysis 
70
 
Jeremy Farrell
5. The Common Link and its Relation to Hadith Terminology 
97
 
Ali Aghaei
6. Hadith Criticism between Traditionists and Jurisprudents 
129
 
Mutaz al-Khatib
7. Hadith Criticism in the Levant in the Twentieth Century: From 
ẓāhir al-isnād to ʿilal al-ḥadīth 
151
 
Ahmad Snober

 vi ] 
Contents
8. The Reception and Representation of Western Hadith Studies in 
Turkish Academe 
171
 
Fatma Kızıl
9. Can Different Questions Yield the Same Answers? Islamic and 
Western Scholarship on Shiʿi Narrators in the Sunni Tradition 
192
 
Michael Dann
Index 
215

 FIGURES AND TABLES
Figures
2.1 Chains of transmitters for C1 
30
2.2 Chains of transmitters for umira bilāl an yashfaʿ … 
33
2.3 Chains of transmitters for C2 
34
2.4 Chains of transmitters for C3 
37
Tables
1.1 The stance of al-Nakhaʿī, Ibn Sīrīn, Qatādah ibn Diʿāmah and 
al-Zuhrī on al-kitāb and the Umayyad punctuation and sectioning 
of the Qurʾān 
17
2.1 Primary sources and the number of narratives they contain for 
each category 
29
2.2 Structural comparison between C1 and C2 
36
2.3 Lexical comparison between C1 and C2 
37
2.4 General outline of C3’s narratives 
38
2.5 The formulae of the adhān and the iqāmah and their repetitions in 
the narratives of C3 
43
4.1 Concurrence between traditionist Sufi and proto-canonical 
hadith works 
83
4.2 Most ‘central’ ḥuffāẓ by ṭabaqah, arranged chronologically 
83
4.3 Mean metrics of prominence and centrality among ḥuffāẓ 
84
4.4 Variability in prominence and centrality in ṭabaqah 
84
4.5 Comparison of traditionist Sufis with contemporary ḥuffāẓ 
(fl. third/ninth century) 
85
4.6 Comparison of traditionist Sufis with contemporary ḥuffāẓ 
(fl. fourth/tenth century) 
85

 [ viii ]
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Most of the chapters in this collection were first offered for comment and crit-
icism, in earlier versions, at the symposium ‘Modern Hadith Studies between 
Arabophone and Western Scholarship’, convened at Pembroke College, 
Oxford, 9–10 January 2017, thanks to a gift from Brian Wilson (d. 2019), Old 
Pembrokian and former civil servant with a special burden for Arabic and 
Chinese. This volume is dedicated to his memory.

 [ ix ]
NOTE ON CONVENTIONS
The editors have imposed spelling, citation style and other conventions 
of Edinburgh University Press on all contributions with two major excep-
tions, both in accordance with usual practice in premodern studies. First, 
Arabic and Persian are transliterated in full (after the Library of Congress 
standard). Secondly, dates are split, the year of the Hijrah preceding that of 
the Common Era (or, sometimes, the two overlapping years of the Common 
Era when the sources do not permit any more precision). In order to make 
them findable in multiple editions, hadith reports in the Six Books are cited 
by book (kitāb) and section (bāb) so as to be compatible with the numbering 
of A. J. Wensinck et al., Concordance et indices de la tradition musulmane, 7 vols 
(Leiden: Brill, 1936–69), referred to in Arabic as al-Muʿjam. They are also cited 
by the most nearly conventional number, usually that of Fuʾād ʿAbd al-Bāqī 
in one of his editions.

 [ x ]
Notes on Contributors
Belal Abu-Alabbas is British Academy Newton International Fellow at the 
University of Exeter and Lecturer at Al-Azhar University in Cairo. He is also 
an Associate Faculty Member at the Oriental Institute in Oxford. He pub-
lishes in the fields of Islamic intellectual history, Islamic legal thought and 
the history of the hadith corpus.
Ali Aghaei is Postdoctoral Researcher at Berlin-Brandenburg Academy of 
Sciences and Humanities (Berlin/Potsdam). His current research focuses on 
philological, palaeographical and codicological analysis of Qur’anic manu-
scripts. He is a Member of the Academic Board for Encyclopaedia Islamica, 
contributing to the Dāneshnāmeh-ye Jahān-e Eslām (Encyclopaedia of the World 
of Islam).
Maroussia Bednarkiewicz is Postdoctoral Fellow at the University of 
Innsbruck. She earned her doctorate from Oxford University on her dis-
sertation documenting the history of the Islamic call to prayer (adhān). Her 
current research focuses on the development of digital means to analyse 
large corpora of classical Arabic texts.
Michael Dann is Assistant Professor at the University of Illinois, Urbana. 
His research interests include Early Islamic history, medieval and modern 
Islamic thought, sectarianism, Sunnism and Shiʿism, hadith, biographical 
literature, and modern Islamic historiography.
Jeremy Farrell is a doctoral candidate at Emory University. His scholarship 
integrates computational and textual methods in order to describe the forma-
tion of Islamic religious movements from the ninth to eleventh centuries ce 
with a focus on Sufism.

  
Notes on Contributors  
[ xi
Mutaz al-Khatib is Assistant Professor of Methodology and Ethics at the 
Centre for Islamic Legislation and Ethics (CILE), Qatar. His research focuses 
on Islamic law, legal thought and ethics. He publishes in the fields of hadith 
criticism, Islamic interpretation methods and Islamic law.
Fatma Kızıl is Assistant Professor of Hadith at Yalova University, Turkey, 
and the editor of Hadīth and Sīra Studies journal. Her research focuses on 
Western hadith studies, isnād-cum-matn analysis and the history of hadith 
transmission. She is the author of Müşterek Râvi Teorisi ve Tenkidi (2013) and 
is currently working on source analysis of Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī.
Christopher Melchert is Professor of Arabic and Islamic Studies at the 
Oriental Institute, Oxford. His research focuses on Islamic movements and 
institutions in the ninth–tenth centuries ce. He publishes in the fields of 
Islamic law, hadith and piety.
Pavel Pavlovitch is Professor in Medieval Arabo-Islamic Civilization at the 
Centre for Oriental Languages and Cultures, Sofia University St Kliment 
Ohridski. He publishes in the fields of early Islamic history, hadith criticism 
and the methodology of studying Muslim traditions. His latest major pub-
lications include the monograph The Formation of the Islamic Understanding 
of Kalāla in the Second Century ah (718–816 ce): Between Scripture and Canon 
(2016) and several entries in Encyclopaedia of Islam Three.
Ahmad Snober is Assistant Professor of Hadith at Istanbul 29 Mayıs 
University. His research focuses on the history of the hadith corpus in the 
Sunni and Imami traditions. He has several publications in Arabic on hadith 
criticism, isnād-matn analysis and back-projection in isnāds.

 
 [ 1 ]
Introduction
Christopher Melchert
‘Ḥadīth’ means ‘speech’ in Arabic. Technically, it indicates a report or a 
body of reports (the Arabic word is used both ways, although there is also 
a plural, aḥādīth) of what the Prophet or some other authoritative teacher 
said. From hadith, Muslim jurisprudents infer the Sunnah, the pattern of 
behaviour that Muslims should follow. A hadith report normally comes in 
two parts, the matn (‘main part’), which is what the Prophet or other author-
ity said, and the isnād (‘support’), the chain of authorities by which it has 
reached the present collector. The isnād is one’s proof that this report was 
not made up somewhere along the way and projected backward onto a ven-
erable authority of the past. In time, writers distinguished between ḥadīth 
going back to the Prophet and āthār (sing. athar) going back to other early 
Muslims, but the terms were interchangeable in the early centuries. (Hadith 
reports were once called ‘traditions’ in European languages, by analogy 
with preliterary oral reports of what Jesus said. ‘Hadith’ is now in standard 
English dictionaries, but ‘traditionist’ may still be used for someone who 
collects hadith.)
Here is an example of a hadith report going back to the Prophet:
There related to us ʿUbayd Allāh ibn Mūsá: there reported to us Ḥanẓalah from 
Sālim from Ibn ʿUmar from the Prophet: he said, ‘It is better for one of you to 
have his insides filled with pus than with poetry.’1
Here is another (henceforward, ‘there related to us’, ‘from’, and so on will be 
abbreviated by a simple sign):
Abū al-Walīd al-Ṭayālisī < Shuʿbah < al-Aʿmash < Abū Ṣāliḥ < Abū Hurayrah < 
the Messenger of God: ‘It is better for one of you to have his insides filled with 
pus than with poetry.’2

 2 ] 
Christopher Melchert
The above are from two of the most trusted Sunni collections of hadith. Here 
is one from a collection of weak hadith:
Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥasan al-Baṣrī < ʿAlī ibn Baḥr < ʿĪsá ibn Yūnus < al-Aḥwaṣ 
ibn al-Ḥakīm < Khālid ibn Maʿdān < Abū al-Dardāʾ < the Messenger of God: ‘It 
is better for one of you to have his insides filled with pus and blood than with 
poetry.’3
Plainly, the quotation was unexceptionable. The collector of this concludes 
his review of hadith from this man, al-Aḥwaṣ ibn al-Ḥakīm, ‘There is nothing 
he relates that is disreputable, except that his isnāds are not matched by 
anyone else’s.’4 That is, he heard genuine hadith, invented chains of trans-
mission leading up to him, and substituted them for the isnāds leading up to 
the men he really heard them from.
The foregoing examples of hadith have mainly concerned the life of piety, 
but the first two help to constitute Islamic law inasmuch as it includes rec-
ommendations, identifying actions that are encouraged but not required or 
discouraged but not forbidden. Many essential rules depend on hadith. For 
example, the Qurʾān continually refers to the ritual prayer and alms (ṣalāh, 
zakāh) as essential duties, but only hadith specify that the ritual prayer begins 
with raising the hands and saying Allāh akbar or that the required alms is one-
fortieth of wealth above a certain level.
Hadith also supports Islamic theology, where definite knowledge is neces-
sary. For example, Sunni collections quote the Prophet as saying, ‘An adul-
terer does not commit adultery as a believer, nor does he drink wine when he 
drinks as a believer, nor does he steal when he steals as a believer.’ The chief 
transmitter of the collection of al-Bukhārī (d. 256/870) glosses this report 
with the note, ‘I have found in the handwriting of Abū Jaʿfar (Muḥammad 
ibn Abī Ḥātim, Bukhārī’s copyist), “Abū ʿAbd Allāh (al-Bukhārī) said, ‘Its 
explanation is that it is snatched away from him’, meaning faith.”’5 This is 
to comment on a theological controversy of the eighth and ninth centuries. 
The Sunni position is definitely that correct belief, not outward actions, 
separates the saved from the perishing. Partly because there are many hadith 
reports that identify this or that misbehaviour as tantamount to unbelief, it 
was necessary to explain that the unbelief associated with wrong actions is a 
temporary state.
The authenticity question became paramount early on. Muslim juris-
prudents, deciding which hadith reports were reliable bases for action and 
belief, had to decide which ones really went back to the Prophet. Part of the 
problem was normally imperfect transmission by dictation or copying of 
manuscripts. For example, al-Bukhārī six times quotes the Prophet as saying, 
‘Actions are only by intentions. Every man has only what he has intended. 
Whosever emigration (hijrah) is to a lower good for him to get, or a woman 
for him to marry, his emigration is to what he emigrated to.’ Although the 
isnāds all go back to one man in the mid-eighth century, no two of them are 

  
Introduction  
[ 3
exactly identical, differing as to details such as the word for ‘marry’ and 
whether ‘intention’ is singular or plural.6 More seriously, the problem often 
went further, into outright contradiction. It is not rare for collections of 
hadith arranged by topic to have a section of hadith in favour of some rule 
followed by a section against; for example, successive sections provided by 
al-Nasāʾī (d. 303/915?) by which the Prophet did or did not perform a special 
prostration in the course of reciting Q. 53.7
Some thinkers cited contradiction as a reason to relegate hadith to sec-
ondary status below the Qurʾān and consensus as indicators of what law to 
follow.8 The position that prevailed accepted a degree of uncertainty. One 
could not be certain that the hadith supporting one’s juridical position (say, 
that it was proper to raise one’s hands repeatedly in the course of the ritual 
prayer) accurately represented the Prophet’s precept and example, but one 
might think that one’s own practice (or, usually, one’s school’s rule) was the 
most likely to represent the Prophet’s precept and example.
The authenticity question dominated hadith scholarship in the Middle 
Ages. Early specialist hadith critics tried to sort more from less likely versions 
of what the Prophet had said. Later specialists concentrated on cataloguing, 
reorganising and synthesising earlier scholarship.9 By sheer numbers, the 
greatest activity seems to have taken place in Egypt. In the Early Modern 
period, India became the most active centre of hadith scholarship.10
Hadith scholarship by Muslims was challenged in the twentieth century 
by scholarship from non-Muslims, starting most notably with a survey by 
Ignaz Goldziher.11 He proposed that hadith literature is so rife with contra-
diction that one’s starting presumption has to be that any particular hadith 
report does not go back to the Prophet, rather, that it reflects the polemical 
interests of later Muslims. Joseph Schacht refined Goldziher’s argument by 
detailing some specific mechanisms by which, he thought, contrary rules 
were generated in the course of the eighth century and corresponding hadith 
projected back into the seventh.12 From the 1980s, G. H. A. Juynboll extended 
Schacht’s work to identify particular traditionists whom he thought to 
identify, by comparison of isnāds, as the probable originators of particular 
reports.13 For very different reasons, some Muslims also downgraded hadith 
in the twentieth century, preferring to rely for religious doctrine on the 
Qurʾān alone.14
Naturally, there have been counterattacks. Refutations of Schacht from 
Muslims have tended to fall back on what appear to outsiders to be dogma 
and special pleading.15 The most prominent European critic of Schacht’s line 
has been Harald Motzki, who combines isnād comparison with more trusting 
presumptions to vindicate most of the hadith he has examined as far back 
as the early eighth century (although seldom to the early seventh).16 Herbert 
Berg has forcefully argued that the authenticity debate is deadlocked over 
initial assumptions, and Motzki also has acknowledged that initial assump-
tions are crucial.17 There remain many other historical questions having to 
do with hadith but not particularly whether they constitute a reliable body of 

 4 ] 
Christopher Melchert
quotations from the early seventh century. This volume especially addresses 
some such questions.
European and American hadith scholarship has been relatively slow 
to develop. Islamic theology was addressed early on, partly one guesses 
because theology seems to Christians to be the natural starting point, partly 
because the Arabic literature the student of Islamic theology apparently 
needs to master is relatively limited. Similarly, the European and American 
study of Islamic law tended at first to concentrate on jurisprudence, uṣūl 
al-fiqh, partly again because the literature is not so immense as for discus-
sions of particular rules, furūʿ al -fiqh, also probably on the assumption that 
starting with the principles is a short-cut to understanding the whole. Hadith 
seems to be the last area to catch on as a subject of study on its own, and the 
nebulousness of hadith is surely one reason for that – nebulous in the sense 
that the literature to be mastered is immense, nebulous also in the sense that 
its boundaries are very uncertain. Earlier students also tended to start with 
synthetic, theoretical treatments of the High Middle Ages, such as the intro-
duction of Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ al-Shahrazūrī (d. Jerusalem, 643/1245).18 They are of 
lively intrinsic interest but as documents of their own time, not as transpar-
ent reproductions of an earlier literature, unchanged except as to ease of 
reference. To analyse the methods of ninth-century critics and collectors, it is 
imperative to examine surviving works of the ninth century itself.
Pavel Pavlovitch has recently established himself as the most thorough 
critic to date of Motzki’s isnād-cum-matn method of isnād comparison.19 In 
this volume, ‘Kunnā nakrahu al-kitāb: Scripture, Transmission of Knowledge, 
and Politics in the Second Century ah (719–816 ce)’ proposes to uncover 
the changing sense of a genuinely early saying as the concerns of Muslims 
changed over time, in this case from distrusting a tyrannical governor’s 
edition of the Qurʾān to accepting that traditionists should keep written 
notes, not trusting to their memories alone. In ‘The History of the Adhān: 
A View from the Hadith Literature’, Maroussia Bednarkiewicz investi-
gates hadith about the form of the call to prayer. The Qurʾān itself refers 
to a call (although using another term, nidāʾ) without laying down a form. 
Bednarkiewicz’ technique of associating different wordings with different 
traditionists clearly shows the influence of Motzki, and she shares with him 
the determination to find an original core story. However, her interest is not 
to correct her predecessors, rather to show how the demands of formulating 
and defending rules over time led to adjusting stories of the Prophet and his 
Companions.
Christopher Melchert, ‘Ibn al-Mubārak, Traditionist’, begins with a survey 
of modern scholarship concerning this prominent eighth-century tradition-
ist, comparing treatments in Arabic and English. It goes on to review his 
personal position as to various controversies of his time, but also regretfully 
observes limits to our understanding of such early figures when so much 
depends on what later compilers quoted of them. Jeremy Farrell, ‘Early 
“Traditionist Sufis”: A Network Analysis’, re-opens a scholarly debate over 

  
Introduction  
[ 5
the intersection between traditionists and Sufis (and their renunciant prede-
cessors) across the eighth to tenth centuries. Like many studies in the new 
discipline of Digital Humanities, Farrell’s statistical analysis does not much 
modify what older methods suggest, in this case that some tenth-century 
Sufis were also significantly involved in networks of hadith transmission. 
Still, such confirmation is welcome, and one looks forward to further statis-
tical work to address such questions as whether hadith circles were small, 
such that everybody knew everybody else, or large and dispersed, so that 
exchange among contemporaries was indeed restricted.
Ali Aghaei, ‘The Common Link and its Relation to Hadith Terminology’, 
compares modern and medieval scholarship. In particular, Aghaei addresses 
the controversy over whether the medieval technical term madār (‘pivot’), 
meaning someone to whom lines of transmission for a particular report con-
tinually converged, was effectively equivalent to Schacht’s term ‘common 
link’. After examining the usage of madār and related terms, Aghaei tends to 
vindicate G. H. A. Juynboll’s assertion that they were. Modern students of 
the Qurʾān have relied heavily on some techniques of literary analysis addi-
tional to those used by medieval scholars, such as rhyme and verse length. 
Modern students of hadith have mostly relied on the same techniques as 
their medieval predecessors, differing mainly as to initial assumptions. As 
Aghaei also observes, however, they do work with rather different objects 
in view.
Moving to the High Middle Ages, Mutaz al-Khatib, ‘Hadith Criticism 
between Traditionists and Jurisprudents’, compares and contrasts hadith 
criticism as practised by traditionists, specialists in hadith, and jurisprudents, 
specialists in inferring the law from revelation. The theory of ninth-century 
Traditionalists, sometimes called ‘Hadith Folk’ for their devotion to hadith, 
was that correct law and theology would clearly emerge from the sifting of 
sound from weak hadith; that is, accurate from inaccurate quotations of the 
Prophet and his Companions. They proceeded by comparing isnāds, discard-
ing uncorroborated reports. On examination, it appears that jurisprudents 
proceeded rather differently, partly because their attention was focused on 
the matn rather than the isnād, partly because they often evidently began with 
a rule to be defended – there are good, practical reasons for wanting the law 
to be stable and predictable.
Ahmad Snober, ‘Hadith Criticism in the Levant in the Twentieth Century: 
From ẓāhir al-isnād to ʿilal al-ḥadīth’, shows that modern Arab scholars were 
for long equally inclined with European to rely on late-medieval synthe-
ses of earlier hadith criticism. In recent decades, however, a subtler, more 
supple approach to hadith criticism has been developed, closer to that of 
ninth- century Sunni critics. The new approach has been promoted largely in 
connection with controversies tangential to hadith, such as the continued rel-
evance of medieval jurisprudence and the proper role of Islam in politics. It 
remains a welcome advance and an instance of convergence between hadith 
studies in and out of the Middle East.

 6 ] 
Christopher Melchert
Fatma Kızıl, ‘The Reception and Representation of Western Hadith Studies 
in Turkish Academe’, surveys developments in the Turkish Republic, which 
has recently become another major centre of hadith scholarship. As in the 
Arab world, students of hadith have been involved in political controversy, 
both internally (different evaluations of Westernisation and secularism, also 
very much the continued relevance of medieval jurisprudence) and exter-
nally (defence against European scepticism). But Kızıl’s account is equally 
hopeful with Snober’s inasmuch as it documents increasing publication of 
serious scholarship.
Finally, Michael Dann, ‘Can Different Questions Yield the Same Answers? 
Islamic and Western Scholarship on Shiʿi Narrators in the Sunni Tradition’, 
surveys scholarship in English, French, German, Arabic, Persian and Turkish. 
The volume of scholarship in Middle Eastern languages is unsurprisingly 
greater and many studies more voluminous than treatments of the same 
topics in European and North American scholarship. Muslim scholars seem 
to be more or less affected by normative considerations, but likewise non-
Muslim, inasmuch as they use the terms of competing traditions.
Although this volume designedly exposes new approaches to the study 
of hadith apart from the authenticity question, that controversy does lurk 
behind many contributions. Jonathan Brown has clearly laid out some of the 
main reasons that what he calls the Historical Critical Method necessarily 
leads to results uncomfortable for the religious tradition.20 The Principle of 
Analogy is the axiom that all ages are equal, so that, for example, if people in 
the near past have demonstrably been influenced by material considerations, 
so must have been people in the distant. This poses particular difficulty for 
the Sunni dogmatic position that the Companions were impeccable, unlike 
any later generation of Muslims. The Principle of Dissimilarity suggests that 
when there are multiple accounts of something, the one that agrees with later 
orthodoxy is the most likely to be a back projection. If we find records that 
eighth-century Muslims advocated one sort of law, ninth-century Muslims 
another, the Principle of Dissimilarity makes it a strong presumption that 
ninth-century quotations of the Prophet in support of ninth-century posi-
tions are not a rediscovery of original Islamic law but a back projection of 
ninth-century conceptions. As Brown observes, these axioms were applied 
to the Bible before the Qurʾān and hadith, so the discomfort of Muslims with 
Goldziher and Schacht today is similar to an earlier generation of Christians’ 
discomfort with Baur and Wellhausen.
An additional difficulty is the nature of research in the Western academy. 
First, tenure and promotion depend largely on publication of original 
research. Secondly, no scholar is lauded as a reinforcer of common under-
standings. Rather, a scholar gets kudos by shifting the way people conceive 
of a field, the greater the shift the more kudos. (Michael Dann refers to 
‘counter-narratives’.) One baleful consequence is the tediously many articles 
that begin by affirming that no intelligent person has ever treated the topic 
at hand before now, or by summarising the common understanding of the 

  
Introduction  
[ 7
question (which the present article will overturn) by some inanity no one has 
actually enounced. Another consequence is that the more genuinely original 
scholars want to be, the more they will constantly probe for weaknesses 
in common understandings. Muslims who complain of hostility to their 
religion are missing the point, but it must be conceded that original scholar-
ship is likely to be uncomfortable for believers. (Let it also be conceded that 
Western scholarship has its own protected orthodoxies, if not religious then, 
for example, the ‘surprising’ degree of women’s agency in any past time 
and place.) And we would offer the present volume as evidence that Islamic 
Studies is a vital field in the Middle East as well as in Europe and North 
America, among Muslim scholars as well as non-Muslim.
Notes
 1. Bukhārī, Ṣaḥīḥ, al-adab 93, bāb mā yukrahu an yakūna al-ghālib ʿalá al-insān al-shiʿr, 
No. 6154.
 2. Abū Dāwūd, Sunan, al-adab 87, bāb mā jāʾa fī al-shiʿr, No. 5009.
 3. Ibn ʿAdī al-Qaṭṭān, al-Kāmil fī ḍuʿafāʾ al-rijāl, ed. ʿĀdil Aḥmad ʿAbd al-Mawjūd 
and ʿAlī Muḥammad Muʿawwaḍ, 9 vols (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 
1418/1997), 2:117, s.n. al-Aḥwaṣ ibn Ḥakīm.
 4. Ibn ʿAdī al-Qaṭṭān, Kāmil 2:119.
 5. Bukhārī, Ṣaḥīḥ, al-maẓālim 30, bāb al-nuhbá bi-ghayr idhn ṣāḥibih, No. 2475 (among 
other places).
 6. Bukhārī, Ṣaḥīḥ, badʾ al-waḥy 1, bāb kayfa kāna badʾ al-waḥy, No. 1; al-‘itq 6, bāb al-khaṭaʾ 
wa-al-nisyān, No. 2529; manāqib al-anṣār 45, bāb hijrat al-nabī, No. 3898; al-nikāḥ 5, bāb 
man hājara aw ʿamila khayran li-tazwīj imraʾah, No. 5070; al-aymān wa-al-nudhūr 23, 
bāb al-nīyah fī al-aymān, No. 6689; al-ḥiyal 1, bāb fī tark al-ḥiyal, No. 6953.
 7. Nasāʾī, Mujtabá, al-iftitāḥ 49, al-sujūd fī wa-al-najm, Nos 958–9, then al-iftitāḥ 50, 
tark al-sujūd fī al-najm, No. 960.
 8. For example, Ḍirār b. ʿAmr (d. c. 180/796–7?), K. al-Taḥrīsh, ed. Hüseyin Hansu 
and Mehmet Keskin (Istanbul: Sharikat Dār al-Irshād and Beirut: Dār Ibn Ḥazm, 
1435/2014).
 9. A good survey of hadith science in the High Middle Ages is Jonathan A. C. 
Brown, Hadith: Muhammad’s Legacy in the Medieval and Modern World, Foundations 
of Islam (Oxford: Oneworld, 2009, 2nd edn 2017).
10. As documented by Muḥammad ʿIṣām ʿArār al-Ḥasanī, Itḥāf al-qārī bi-maʿrifat 
juhūd wa-aʿmāl al-ʿulamaʾ ʿalá Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī (Damascus: al-Yamāmah, 1987).
11. Ignaz Goldziher, ‘The Ḥadīth Literature’, in Muslim Studies, ed. S. M. Stern, 
trans. C. R. Barber and S. M. Stern, 2 vols (Chicago: Aldine Atherton, 1968–71), 
2:189–251.
12. Joseph Schacht, The Origins of Muhammadan Jurisprudence (Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1950).
13. See esp. G. H. A. Juynboll, Muslim Tradition, Cambridge Studies in Islamic 
Civilization (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983), and G. H. A. 
Juynboll, Encyclopedia of Canonical Ḥadīth (Leiden: Brill, 2007).

 8 ] 
Christopher Melchert
14. For one angle, see Aisha Y. Musa, Ḥadīth as Scripture: Discussions on the Authority 
of Prophetic Traditions in Islam (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008). For 
another, see Fatma Kızıl, Chapter 8, this volume, esp. at nn. 73–4.
15. The most extensive example is M. Mustafa al-Azami, On Schacht’s Orig ins 
of Muhammadan Jurisprudence (Riyadh: King Saud University, 1985), much 
reprinted, on which see the critique of Harald Motzki, The Origins of Islamic 
Jurisprudence, trans. Marion H. Katz, Islamic History and Civilization, Studies 
and Texts, 41 (Leiden: Brill, 2002), 39–45.
16. See esp. Motzki, Origins; Harald Motzki, with Nicolet Boekhoff-van der Voort and 
Sean W. Anthony, Analysing Muslim Traditions, Islamic History and Civilization, 
Studies and Texts, 78 (Leiden: Brill, 2010), which includes several articles trans-
lated from German; and Harald Motzki, ‘Dating Muslim Traditions’, Arabica 52 
(2005): 204–53. See also Ḥadīth: Origins and Developments, ed. Harald Motzki, The 
Formation of the Classical Islamic World, 28 (Aldershot: Ashgate/Variorum, 
2004), a collection of earlier articles by European and American scholars, most, 
but not all, calling for less scepticism than Schacht and Juynboll.
17. Herbert Berg, The Development of Exegesis in Early Islam, Curzon Studies in the 
Qurʾān (Richmond: Curzon, 2000), ch. 2; Motzki, ‘Dating’.
18. See Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ, An Introduction to the Science of the Ḥadīth, trans. Eerik Dickinson 
with Muneer Fareed, Great Books of Islamic Civilisation (Reading: Garnet, 2005).
19. Pavel Pavlovitch, The Formation of the Islamic Understanding of kalāla in the Second 
Century ah (718–816 ce), Islamic History and Civilization, Studies and Texts, 126 
(Leiden: Brill, 2016).
20. Brown, Hadith (2009), ch. 8, esp. 200–3.

 [ 9 ]
CHAPTER
1
KUNNA
¯ NAKRAHU AL-KITA
¯B: SCRIPTURE, 
TRANSMISSION OF KNOWLEDGE, AND 
POLITICS IN THE SECOND CENTURY ah 
(719–816 ce)
Pavel Pavlovitch*
Introduction
This chapter centres on Ibn Shihāb al-Zuhrī’s (d. 124/742) statement, ‘We 
were averse to writing down knowledge until these rulers forced us to 
(accept) it, and therefore we thought it best not to forbid it to any Muslim.’ I 
argue that the tradition comprises two conceptual layers, bearing on specific 
historical settings from the late Umayyad and the early ʿAbbāsid periods. The 
oldest layer, which I designate ‘the scriptural concern’, originally included 
the phrase ‘We were averse to kitāb (scripture)’ as a negative response to the 
redaction of the Qurʾān carried out in the reign of ʿAbd al-Malik ibn Marwān 
(r. 65–86/685–705). The nub of the more recent ‘equalitarian concern’ at the 
matn’s end is the struggle of the non-Arab Muslims (mawālī) in the second 
half of the second century ah (767–816 ce) for an equal right with the Arabs 
to acquire knowledge of Tradition.
In a short but instructive report (hereinafter, ‘the coercion tradition’), the 
renowned hadith collector Ibn Shihāb al-Zuhrī (d. 124/742) declares:
(1) Kunnā nakrahu kitāba al-ʿilm (2) ḥattá akrahanā ʿalayhi hāʾulāʾi al-umarāʾ (3) 
fa-raʾaynā an-lā namnaʿahu aḥadan min al-muslimīn.
(1) We were averse to writing down knowledge (2) until these rulers forced us 
to [accept] it, (3) and therefore we thought it best not to forbid it to any Muslim.1
In modern scholarship, al-Zuhrī’s words have been conventionally inter-
preted as expressing his discontent with an Umayyad initiative to record 
Tradition (kitāb al-ʿilm). In a study of the coercion tradition by means of 
isnād-cum-matn analysis,2 I developed the argument that, either partly or 
in full, it goes back to the first half of the second century ah (718–68 ce), 
and that clause 1 originally read, kunnā nakrahu al-kitāb (‘we were averse to 
kitāb’). Insofar as the word kitāb connotes ‘holy writ’, I suspected that in its 

 10 ] 
Pavel Pavlovitch
earliest form the clause implied a ‘scriptural concern’ that later transmitters 
glossed over in three different ways. Most of them substituted for the word 
kitāb the iḍāfah-compound kitāb al-ʿilm (‘writing down knowledge’); a few 
transformed the same word into the semantically straightforward kitābah 
(‘writing’) or replaced it with the obfuscating accusative pronouns -hu and 
-hā; that is, nakrahuhu/hā (‘we were averse to it’).
In this chapter, I argue that the text (matn) of the coercion tradition is an 
amalgam of conceptual layers, bearing on specific historical settings from 
the late Umayyad and the early ʿAbbāsid periods. The oldest layer, repre-
sented by the statement kunnā nakrahu al-kitāb, embodies al-Zuhrī’s negative 
response to the redaction of the Qurʾān that the governor of Iraq al-Ḥajjāj 
ibn Yūsuf undertook between ah 84 and 85 (703–4 ce) on the order of the 
caliph ʿAbd al-Malik ibn Marwān (r. 65–86/685–705). The more recent layer 
includes the ‘equalitarian concern’ at the matn’s end, which alludes to the 
struggle of the non-Arab Muslims (mawālī) in the second half of the second 
century ah/767–816 ce for an equal right to acquire knowledge of Tradition.
Semantic Strains and Composite Structure
Given al-Zuhrī’s amicable relationship with several Umayyad caliphs,3 his 
negative stance on their policy to record Tradition is striking. If he embraced 
the writing of Tradition after having initially opposed it, as Schoeler and Cook 
interpret the coercion tradition,4 is not he expected to assess the Umayyad ini-
tiative in positive terms, or, lest he be suspected of duplicity, to at least refrain 
from expressing an opinion altogether? To explain the semantic tension 
between clauses 1 (opposition to writing) and 2 (grudging endorsement 
thereof), Cook considered al-Zuhrī’s reference to the rulers’ coercion as an 
excuse betraying the original weakness of those scholars who upheld written 
transmission of knowledge against an oralist majority.5 Schoeler raised the 
possibility that Maʿmar ibn Rāshid, who disliked the Umayyads, may have 
ascribed clause 2 to al-Zuhrī.6 Besides, Maʿmar’s editing of the matn may have 
been driven by a wish to erase the memory of al-Zuhrī’s one-time friendship 
with the ancien régime, which certainly gave rise to ideological qualms during 
the early ʿAbbāsid period. The latter two possibilities suggest that the matn of 
the coercion tradition may be an amalgam of  political and scholarly concerns, 
some of which post-date al-Zuhrī.
Clause 3 is no less perplexing than the preceding two clauses. Forced to 
record Tradition (clause 2), al-Zuhrī finds it best not to forbid its knowl-
edge to any Muslim (clause 3). How do these two clauses work together? 
Do they imply that oral transmission hindered the spread of knowledge, 
whereas writing would be conducive towards its wider dissemination? If 
so, al-Zuhrī comes across, once again, as an unblushing opportunist who 
first advocated oral transmission, although he knew that it prevented many 
Muslims from knowledge, then yielded to political pressure in favour of 
writing, but presented his currying of the rulers’ favour as solicitude for the 

  
Kunnā nakrahu al-kitāb 
[ 11
spread of knowledge among Muslims. In its present context, clause 3 would 
seem to betray a politically induced attempt to besmirch al-Zuhrī rather than 
impartially describe his opinion as to how and to whom knowledge should 
be transmitted.
Alternatively, as suggested by Kister, al-Zuhrī’s action in clause 3 may 
have been his way of decrying the rulers’ coercion described in clause 2.7 But 
why would al-Zuhrī express his protest by encouraging all Muslims to write 
down traditions? Kister explained that a request to write for the caliph’s 
sons possibly unreliable traditions serving Umayyad political interests irked 
al-Zuhrī, and he responded by encouraging people to record traditions 
with sound attribution to early Islamic authorities.8 Such an interpretation, 
however, presupposes a ripe system of hadith transmission and criticism, 
based on the concept of uninterrupted chains of transmission (isnāds) going 
back to the Prophet and his Companions, which was not in place during 
al-Zuhrī’s lifetime.9
Our inability to explain coherently al-Zuhrī’s motives and intentions 
points to a problem in the conventional understanding of the coercion tradi-
tion. The semantic difficulties stem from two factors: (1) the lack of attention 
to the matn’s composite structure; and (2) the questionable premise that it 
deals with the same episode in the early history of hadith science as a number 
of multifarious reports depicting Umayyad initiatives to record Tradition.
Ostensible Similarities
Three different Umayyad caliphs are reported to have bidden al-Zuhrī to 
codify either the entire Sunnah or some of its parts. In the present section, I 
take up six traditions that describe codification initiatives by ʿUmar ibn ʿAbd 
al-ʿAzīz (r. 99–101/717–20) and Hishām ibn ʿAbd al-Malik (r. 105–25/724–
43). A report mentioning ʿAbd al-Malik ibn Marwān will be treated in the 
next section.
1. Abū ʿUbayd (d. 224/838–9?) cites a tradition in which ʿUmar ibn ʿAbd 
al-ʿAzīz asks al-Zuhrī to write down the various aspects of the Sunnah 
concerning the alms tax.10
2. In a similar tradition, Ibn Abī Khaythamah (d. 279/892) presents 
ʿUmar ibn ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz’s initiative as an overarching project. The 
caliph reportedly ordered al-Zuhrī and other traditionists to ‘collect 
[all] traditions’ (jamʿ al-sunan). They were written down in notebooks, 
which were dispatched to each province under caliphal authority.11
3. Ibn Saʿd (d. 230/845) reports that Hishām ibn ʿAbd al-Malik ordered 
al-Zuhrī to write traditions and dispatched scribes to record under his 
dictation.12
4. In a tradition cited by al-Fasawī (d. 277/890) and Abū Nuʿaym 
(d. 430/1038), al-Zuhrī agrees that Hishām ibn ʿAbd al-Malik may send 
scribes to record traditions during his lessons.13

 12 ] 
Pavel Pavlovitch
5. Al-Fasawī also reports that al-Zuhrī dictated 400 traditions for Hishām’s 
sons. One month later Hishām pretended that the traditions had been 
lost, whereupon al-Zuhrī dictated them anew. Upon comparing the 
two versions, Hishām found out that al-Zuhrī ‘did not depart from a 
single letter’.14
6. Abū Nuʿaym reports that Hishām ibn ʿAbd al-Malik forced (akraha) 
al-Zuhrī to write hadith for the caliph’s sons, whereupon others began 
to write.15
Traditions Nos 1 and 2 suggest that no later than the first half of the third 
century ah (815–65 ce), hadith scholars associated ʿUmar ibn ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz 
with a project to codify the Sunnah, for which he enlisted the help of al-Zuhrī 
and, possibly, other scholars. Abbott may be right that tradition No 1, which 
limits al-Zuhrī’s codifying activity to the alms tax, is earlier than tradition No. 
2, which credits him with the grand project of ‘collecting [all] traditions’.16 
Significantly, Ibn Abī Khaythamah states that ʿUmar ibn ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz dis-
patched copies of the Sunnaic codex to the outlying provinces, a motif in 
which Schoeler recognised an echo of reports about the caliph ʿUthmān’s 
codification of the Qurʾān c. 30/650.17 Note also that the expression jamʿ al-
sunan brings to mind the similar expression jamʿ al-Qurʾān (collection of the 
Qurʾān) used to describe Abū Bakr’s (r. 11–13/632–4) gathering of records of 
the revelation made during the Prophet’s lifetime.18 These correspondences 
may be pointing to an attempt on behalf of the originator of tradition No. 2 
to assert the equal authority of the Qurʾān and the Sunnah as legal sources. 
If so, a third-century Sitz im Leben for this tradition would seem feasible,19 in 
which case it is almost certainly later than tradition No. 1.
Despite the semblance of similarity, traditions Nos 1 and 2 differ substan-
tially from the coercion tradition. Abū ʿUbayd cites a long narrative, in which 
al-Zuhrī treats the issue of the alms tax, without appealing to earlier authori-
ties. Even if al-Zuhrī based his exposition on a stock of memorised narratives, 
it hardly constitutes a ‘writing of Tradition’, due to the absence therein of any 
traditions in the conventional sense of the word. Ibn Abī Khaythamah speaks 
about jamʿ al-sunan, which presupposes (not least because of its similarity to 
Abū Bakr’s jamʿ al-Qurʾān) the existence of written traditions that ʿUmar ibn 
ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz ordered to be collected or transcribed on a different medium. 
According to this scenario, ʿUmar’s initiative would be different and, signifi-
cantly, later than the initial instigation to write Tradition presumably referred 
to in the coercion tradition. And, for good measure, traditions Nos 1 and 2 do 
not include a coercion motif, explicitly or by implication, which further under-
mines the possibility of their bearing on the same historical circumstances.
Traditions Nos 3, 4, 5 and 6 name Hishām ibn ʿAbd al-Malik as the royal 
champion of the writing of Tradition. Tradition No. 3 describes Hishām 
as having ordered (amara) al-Zuhrī to dictate traditions, which suggests a 
context resembling that of the coercion tradition. Nonetheless, the verb amara 
does not connote the compulsion and resentment inherent in the semantics 

  
Kunnā nakrahu al-kitāb 
[ 13
of akraha/kariha, and al-Zuhrī is said to have dictated to Hishām’s scribes. 
The latter detail is not present in the coercion tradition, which mentions 
al-Zuhrī alone and does not involve the said scribes.
Like Nos 1 and 2, traditions Nos 4 and 5 do not present al-Zuhrī as yield-
ing to Umayyad pressure to write down hadith. One notes immediately that 
according to No. 4 al-Zuhrī was already teaching (willingly, it appears) to 
a considerable audience, signalled by the clause idhā ijtamaʿa ilayya al-nās 
(‘as people would come together with me’). Thus, tradition No. 4 depicts a 
setting of tranquil teaching strikingly dissimilar to the dramatic atmosphere 
in the coercion tradition where al-Zuhrī imparts his knowledge to the people 
after being forced to write. Arguably, No. 4 may have been a polemical 
response to the claims raised in the coercion tradition.
Tradition No. 5 aims at buttressing al-Zuhrī’s veracity. This is clear from 
the trial topos, which is the crux of the narrative. The original disseminator of 
this tradition must have been a proponent of literal transmission (al-riwāyah 
bi-al-lafẓ), implied in the statement that the second dictation of al-Zuhrī’s 400 
traditions agreed literatim with his first dictation.
To the best of my knowledge, the earliest source to include tradition No. 
6 is Abū Nuʿaym’s (d. 430/1038) Ḥilyat al-awliyāʾ, which makes it too late to 
be representative of either al-Zuhrī’s lifetime or the Sitz im Leben of the other 
three traditions.
The isnāds of the above six traditions witness to the meagre likelihood of 
their being a depiction of the same historical event referred to in the coercion 
tradition. These isnāds do not intersect at any level of transmission, and their 
association with al-Zuhrī is tenuous. In tradition No. 1, Abū ʿUbayd cites 
ʿUqayl ibn Khālid, who died between 141 and 144/758–6220; that is, at least 
ten years before Abū ʿUbayd’s birth in around 157/773–4.21 Abū ʿUbayd may 
have used a written source with ʿUqayl’s traditions, but, absent direct evi-
dence, this possibility remains a hypothesis scarcely supported by biographi-
cal data.22 One may argue that Abū ʿUbayd, or, for that matter, al-Zuhrī, based 
his alms-tax exposition on a written document (kitāb) prepared by the Prophet 
and preserved by members of ʿUmar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb’s family. However, 
Abū ʿUbayd’s tradition to that effect (No. 936)23 betrays a growth of the 
isnād whereby al-Zuhrī’s personal effort to record parts of the Sunnah (Abū 
ʿUbayd, No. 1850 = tradition No. 1 above) came to be portrayed as a document 
belonging to the idealised period of the Prophet’s lifetime. Pace Juynboll, who 
tends to consider such taxation provisions as probably emanating from the 
lifetime of the Prophet,24 I hesitate to date tradition No. 1 earlier than the year 
170/786–7, when Abū ʿUbayd reportedly set about studying hadith.25
Tradition No. 2 is carried by the isnād Ibn Abī Khaythamah > Ibrāhīm ibn 
al-Mundhir (d. 236/850–1) > Maʿn ibn ʿĪsá (d. 198/813–14) > Saʿīd ibn Ziyād 
(d. ?). Saʿīd ibn Ziyād is an obscure mawlá of the Zuhrid family,26 who is not 
on record as having transmitted to Maʿn ibn ʿĪsá. Even if we assume the 
authenticity of the transmission above the level of Saʿīd, this will lead us to 
the second half of the second century ah as the earliest period when tradition 

 14 ] 
Pavel Pavlovitch
No. 2 may have been put into circulation. This conclusion should be qualified 
with the results of our above matn analysis, which point to the last decades 
of the second century ah, that is, the later part of Ibrāhīm ibn al-Mundhir’s 
lifetime, as the timeframe for the circulation of No. 2.
Tradition No. 3 is based on the isnād Ibn Saʿd > al-Wāqidī (d. 207/823), 
reporting on the authority of al-Zuhrī’s nephew Muḥammad ibn ʿAbd Allāh 
ibn Muslim (d. 157/773–4?). Biographical reports about Muḥammad ibn 
ʿAbd Allāh agree that he used to associate with al-Zuhrī traditions unparal-
leled by reliable auxiliary transmissions (mutābiʿāt).27 Muḥammad’s alleged 
attendance of al-Zuhrī’s lessons together with Hishām ibn ʿAbd al-Malik’s 
scribes may have been one of these suspect narratives; apart from Ibn Saʿd, it 
is mentioned only by al-Mizzī.28
Tradition No. 4 is said to have reached al-Fasawī via ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz ibn 
ʿAbd Allāh al-Uwaysī (d. ?), reporting on the authority of Ibrāhīm ibn Saʿd 
(d. 182–5/798–802). Ibrāhīm ibn Saʿd is a reliable transmitter, and if suspi-
cion ever arose regarding his isnāds, it affected exactly those on the author-
ity of al-Zuhrī, at the time of whose death Ibrāhīm may have been between 
fourteen and sixteen years old.29
Tradition No. 5 is based on the isnād Hishām ibn Khālid al-Salāmī 
(d. 249/863–4) > al-Walīd ibn Muslim (d. 194–5/809–11) > Saʿīd ibn Bashīr 
(d. 168–70/784–7). The original disseminator may have been any of these 
three men, each of whom was active in Syria, but Hishām ibn Khālid and 
Saʿīd ibn Bashīr, being described as ṣadūq (sincere),30 are the most likely can-
didates. Hence, the tradition may be dated to either the period 125–70/742–
86 or the first half of the third century ah (815–65 ce).
Abū Nuʿaym’s tradition (No. 6) is based on the isnād Abū Ḥāmid ibn 
Jabalah > Abū al-ʿAbbās al-Sarrāj > Dāwūd ibn Rushayd (239/854) > Abū 
al-Malīḥ. As in Nos 1, 2, 3 and 4, the earliest transmitter in the isnād of No. 
6 is its most problematic link. Our biographical sources know of two Abū 
al-Malīḥs who fit in the chronological framework of the report. First, Abū 
al-Malīḥ ibn Usāmah ibn ʿUmayr, who was active in Basra, is said to have 
died in the year 98/716–17,31 108/726–732 or 112/730–1.33 Only the first date 
allows unquestionably for Usāmah ibn ʿUmayr’s having witnessed, as he 
asserts, Hishām’s coercion of al-Zuhrī to write down Tradition, which must 
have followed Hishām’s ascension to the throne in 105/724. The possibil-
ity that Usāmah ibn ʿUmayr is Abū al-Malīḥ from Abū Nuʿaym’s isnād is 
also undermined by the fact that none of the few biographers who include 
Usāmah in their dictionaries mention among his pupils a man by the name 
Dāwūd ibn Rushayd. The latter is known as a transmitter from another Abū 
al-Malīḥ – al-Ḥasan ibn ʿUmar al-Raqqī (d. 181/797–8). Given that al-Ḥasan 
ibn ʿUmar died fifty-seven lunar years after al-Zuhrī, it is highly unlikely that 
he had first-hand memories about the commencement of Hishām’s policy to 
write down Tradition, which, for good measure, may hardly have occurred 
in the final few years of al-Zuhrī’s lifetime. It is true that al-Ḥasan ibn ʿUmar 
is said to have died at the age of ninety-four, or ninety-five lunar years, but I 

  
Kunnā nakrahu al-kitāb 
[ 15
suspect that his longevity was a means to cast aside suspicion of the reliabil-
ity of his transmission from al-Zuhrī.34
Our examination of the isnāds supporting the traditions that associate 
either ʿUmar ibn ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz or Hishām ibn ʿAbd al-Malik with the policy 
to write down Tradition shows that they are affected by similar reliability 
issues. In none of these isnāds is it possible to ascertain the historicity of the 
earliest authorities’ witnessing of al-Zuhrī’s ceding to Umayyad pressure to 
record Tradition. The matns are similarly problematic. In five out of six tradi-
tions, the coercion element is absent; two different caliphs are mentioned as 
the initiators of the policy to write down Tradition, and the description of 
their initiative varies substantially from one report to another. These reports 
should be discarded as evidence about the Sitz im Leben of the coercion 
 tradition, which is, it appears, in a class of its own.
The Scriptural Concern
In an isolated biographical report, Ibn ʿAsākir (d. 571/1176) describes the 
events following an encounter between al-Zuhrī and ʿAbd al-Malik ibn 
Marwān (r. 65–86/685–705):
Kharaja al-Zuhrī min al-Khaḍrāʾ . . . min ʿindi ʿAbd al-Malik fa-qāla: Yā ayyuhā 
al-nās innā qad kunnā manaʿnākum shayʾan qad badhalnāhu li-hāʾulāʾ fa-taʿālaw ḥattá 
uḥaddithakum.35
Al-Zuhrī came out from [the palace] al-Khaḍrāʾ . . . from the presence of ʿAbd 
al-Malik, and said, ‘O people, verily, we withheld from you something that we 
had granted to these [rulers]. Come forward so that I may tell you!’ 
This tradition is found in a late source, and the earliest transmitter in its 
isnād is the Syrian al-Walīd ibn Muslim (119–95/737–810/11), who was 
born too late to have met al-Zuhrī (d. 124/742). Admittedly, the isnād casts 
serious doubt on the association of Ibn ʿAsākir’s tradition with al-Zuhrī; its 
matn, however, includes unmistakable points of similarity to the matn of the 
coercion tradition. The verb manaʿa and the demonstrative pronoun hāʾulāʾ 
are used in a context strikingly resembling that of clauses 2 and 3 in the coer-
cion tradition’s matn. The use of the verb badhala brings to mind a variant of 
the coercion tradition that Ibn Abī Khaythamah reports on the authority of 
Sufyān ibn ʿUyaynah.36 Granting that Ibn ʿAsākir’s tradition and the coer-
cion tradition bear on identical historical circumstances, we may make two 
important conclusions. First, the coercion tradition describes events from 
ʿAbd al-Malik’s reign; and secondly, the object of al-Zuhrī’s resentment was 
not the writing of Tradition. As much is suggested by Ibn ʿAsākir’s tradition, 
in which al-Zuhrī states, fa-taʿālaw ḥattá uḥaddithakum, that is, ‘come forward 
so that I may tell you’ or ‘transmit hadith to you’. In neither case does the 
context of the tradition suggest that the expression ‘we withheld from you 
something that we had granted to those [rulers]’ in the incipit of al-Zuhrī’s 

 16 ] 
Pavel Pavlovitch
statement and the verb ḥaddatha at its end imply his acceptance of written 
transmission of knowledge. Accordingly, al-Zuhrī’s aversion to kitāb in the 
coercion tradition would appear to bear relationship to events from ʿAbd al-
Malik’s caliphate other than the writing of Tradition.
This hypothesis finds support in al-Dārimī’s report that Ibrāhīm al-Nakhaʿī 
(d. 96/714) kāna yakrahu al-kitāb.37 Al-Nakhaʿī died before the reigns of ʿUmar 
ibn ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz and Hishām ibn ʿAbd al-Malik, who are mentioned as 
champions of writing down Tradition (see section three above); he died 
after ʿAbd al-Malik, who is a central figure in Ibn ʿAsākir’s tradition. Since 
neither al-Walīd ibn ʿAbd al-Malik nor his brother Sulaymān, whose reigns 
intervened between those of ʿAbd al-Malik and ʿUmar ibn ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz, is 
known to have dealt with the codification of Tradition, al-Nakhaʿī’s aver-
sion to kitāb most likely refers to the same events from ʿAbd al-Malik’s reign 
that roused al-Zuhrī’s aversion to kitāb. To this we must add that a number 
of traditions catalogue Muḥammad ibn Sīrīn (d. 110/729) and Qatādah ibn 
Diʿāmah (d. 117/735–6?) among those who kāna yakrahu al-kitāb.38 In regard 
to the blind Qatādah, the word kitāb, no doubt, signifies ‘book’ not ‘writing’: 
Qatādah reportedly despised the sound of kitāb being put in front of him and 
would reach out a hand to push it away.39
If kitāb was somehow not to the taste of al-Nakhaʿī, Ibn Sīrīn, and Qatādah, 
and if they were responding to events from ʿAbd al-Mālik’s reign, is it pos-
sible to establish the nature of these events? Is there a relationship between 
the aversion of these figures to kitāb, on the one hand, and al-Zuhrī’s attitude 
described in the coercion tradition, on the other? Which aspect of kitāb both-
ered these scholars so much?
A major event in the caliphate of ʿAbd al-Malik was his project, supervised 
by the governor of Iraq, al-Ḥajjāj ibn Yūsuf, to prepare a uniform canonical 
codex of the Qurʾān.40 Al-Ḥajjāj carried out the caliph’s enterprise, which 
Omar Hamdan dubbed ‘the second maṣāḥif project’, in al-Wāsiṭ between the 
years 84 and 85 ah (703–4 ce).41 The Umayyad undertaking elicited a nega-
tive reaction from renowned scholars,42 including Ibrāhīm al-Nakhaʿī, Ibn 
Sīrīn and Qatādah ibn Diʿāmah, each of whom, it will be recalled, is known 
as someone who kāna yakrahu al-kitāb. Remarkably, these scholars’ opposition 
to ʿAbd al-Malik’s maṣāḥif project is cast in identical terms: kāna yakrahu 
al-naqṭ.43 The word naqṭ may refer either to the diacritical points that distin-
guish between skeletally identical consonants in the Qurʾān (e.g., ـبـ ,ـنـ ,ـتـ ,ـثـ)44 
or to the symbols of vertically (
:::
) or horizontally (:::) aligned dots used as 
verse separators in early Qurʾān manuscripts.45 According to our literary 
sources, both types of ‘punctuation’ were introduced in the course of the 
second maṣāḥif project.
That al-Nakhaʿī, Ibn Sīrīn and Qatādah may have resented an innovative 
arrangement of the Qurʾān is suggested by a peculiar tradition according to 
which Ibn Sīrīn and al-Ḥasan al-Baṣrī were averse (kānā yakrahāni) awrād.46 
Abū ʿUbayd (d. 224/838–9?) explains that the tradition refers to a practice of 
dividing the Qurʾān into large textual units (wird, pl. awrād) of equal length. 

  
Kunnā nakrahu al-kitāb 
[ 17
Each wird comprised several sūrahs, picked out regardless of their position 
in the established sequence (taʾlīf) of sūrahs. Abū ʿUbayd does not specify 
who introduced the awrād, but the mention of Ibn Sīrīn and al-Ḥasan al-Baṣrī 
as its opponents suggests, once again, ʿAbd al-Malik’s maṣāḥif project as the 
likely trigger for the awrād scandal. Although never mentioned in relation to 
the second maṣāḥif project, al-Zuhrī also may have disliked ʿAbd al-Malik’s 
innovations, which not only instituted the punctuation of the Qurʾān, but 
also may have resulted in the division of the initially integral text of scripture 
into individual sūrahs47 and the delimitation of āyahs within each sūrah.
In sum, ʿAbd al-Malik’s initiative to introduce naqṭ and, possibly, to effect 
an innovative sectioning of the Qurʾān (awrād) was dismissed by Muḥammad 
ibn Sīrīn, while Ibrāhīm al-Nakhaʿī and Qatādah ibn Diʿāmah shared with 
Ibn Sīrīn an aversion to naqṭ. These three scholars were also averse to kitāb. 
Understanding this word as ‘scripture’ will allow us to establish a logical 
connection between lines 1, 2, and 3 in Table 1.1: al-Nakhaʿī, Ibn Sīrīn and 
Qatādah, all of whom were active in Iraq, apparently rejected the recension 
of the Islamic scripture that the governor of Iraq, al-Ḥajjāj ibn Yūsuf, under-
took at ʿAbd al-Malik’s behest. Apart from ‘scripture’, kitāb in the present 
context seems to connote ‘to conjoin’, ‘bring together’ and ‘sew’. These mean-
ings of the verb kataba48 bring to mind the notion of the Qurʾān’s arrange-
ment (taʾlīf). Al-Ḥajjāj ibn Yūsuf’s taʾlīf, perhaps the first in the history of the 
Qurʾān, may be thought to have provoked Ibn Sīrīn’s retort: ‘Allāh’s taʾlīf is 
better than your taʾlīf!’49
There are no extant biographical reports that elucidate al-Zuhrī’s attitude 
towards the second maṣāḥif project, but one might reasonably think that it was 
negative as well. This much may be inferred from al-Zuhrī’s unqualified use 
of the word kitāb in the locution kunnā nakrahu al-kitāb in the original version 
of the coercion tradition. Like other scholars of his time, al-Zuhrī perceived 
as coercion (ikrāh) the state-sponsored effort to impose the newly dotted and 
sectioned version of scripture as the only binding codex.50 Notwithstanding 
his initial discontent, al-Zuhrī eventually acquiesced to the Umayyad codex, 
because it introduced a uniform text of scripture. As I have argued else-
where, by the end of the first century ah the Qurʾān was transforming from 
Table 1.1 The stance of al-Nakhaʿī, Ibn Sīrīn, Qatādah ibn Diʿāmah and 
al-Zuhrī on (1) al-kitāb and (2, 3) the Umayyad punctuation and sectioning 
of the Qurʾān
Ibrāhīm al-Nakhaʿī 
(d. 96/714)
Muḥammad ibn Sīrīn 
(d. 110/729)
Qatādah ibn 
Diʿāmah (d. 
117/735–6?)
Ibn Shihāb 
al-Zuhrī (d. 
124/742)
1
Kāna yakrahu al-kitāb Kāna yakrahu al-kitāb
Kāna yakrahu al-kitāb Kunnā nakrahu 
al-kitāb
2
Kāna yakrahu al-naqṭ Kāna yakrahu al-naqṭ
Kāna yakrahu al-naqṭ
n/a
3
n/a
Kāna yakrahu al-awrād n/a
n/a

 18 ] 
Pavel Pavlovitch
scripture used for ritual purposes into a canonical source of Islamic law.51 
The uniform reading had become a prerequisite for an effective exegesis of 
the Qurʾān, and al-Ḥajjāj’s kitāb afforded the needed textual basis even for 
those scholars who initially opposed the Umayyad codification project.
The Equalitarian Concern
In the second section, I highlighted the semantic tension between al-Zuhrī’s 
submission to the official demand to write down Tradition (clause 2) and his 
decision to share his knowledge with all Muslims (clause 3). This tension, 
as well as the possibility to remove clause 3 without opening a structural 
or semantic gap, indicate that this clause was a later addition to the original 
matn. But who may have been interested in asserting al-Zuhrī’s eagerness? 
The key to answering this question lies in the ‘equalitarian concern’ in clause 
3, most conspicuously articulated in al-Fasawī’s version of the coercion tradi-
tion, in which clause 3 reads, fa-aḥbabnā an nuwāsiya bayna al-nās (‘and we pre-
ferred to make the people equal’).52 Kister observes that clause 3 advocates a 
universal and equal entitlement to knowledge, notwithstanding social status 
or gender.53 If extended to matters of descent and ethnicity, Kister’s conclu-
sion brings us to the status of the non-Arab Muslims (mawālī) and their bid 
for equality with the Arabs during the second/eight century.
By the beginning of al-Ḥajjāj ibn Yūsuf’s office in Iraq (75–95/694–714), 
many non-Arabs had embraced Islam, abandoned their farmlands and 
settled in urban centres, where they sought both relief from taxation and an 
alternative source of income as, for instance, service in the conquest army.54 
The conversion of many mawālī to Islam for such fiscal advantages as avoid-
ing the poll tax (jizyah), and also probably the land tax (kharāj), deprived the 
central government of significant proceeds.55 To counter the decline of tax 
income, Umayyad officials hindered conversion to Islam and on many occa-
sions continued to levy the same taxes on converts that they had been paying 
before embracing Islam.56 During his short reign (99–101/717–20), ʿUmar ibn 
ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz tried to redress the injustice, but his policy had no lasting con-
sequences in the eastern part of the empire either because he died too early 
to supervise its full implementation or because this policy faltered in the face 
of the insurmountable resistance of the influential notables in the east. In any 
case, ʿUmar ibn ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz’s policy embodied a tendency to treat Arabs 
and mawālī on an equal footing in matters of religion and taxation. Now, 
al-Zuhrī’s alleged call for equality in the knowledge of Tradition makes sense 
in the context of ʿUmar ibn ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz’s caliphate. Such knowledge could 
have been especially beneficial for those non-Arabs who embraced Islam and 
strove to assert their newly-gained rights in matters of taxation.
Might al-Zuhrī have advocated equality between Arabs and mawālī? As 
noted by Abbott, by the end of the first century ah the mawālī had entered an 
open economic and cultural competition with their Arab overlords, which 
had ramifications in the field of the emerging religious sciences, hence, the 

  
Kunnā nakrahu al-kitāb 
[ 19
transmission of knowledge.57 The rise of mawālī to social and scholarly prom-
inence was not to the taste of the pure Arab al-Zuhrī: he is said to have been 
hostile to both transmission on the authority of mawālī58 and alarmed by their 
presence in the provincial scholarly élites.59 Thus, the equalitarian concern 
at the end of the coercion tradition would seem to refer to a Sitz im Leben 
other than ʿUmar ibn ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz’ policy of restoring justice to the mawālī 
converts deprived of due fiscal privileges. A transmitter other than al-Zuhrī 
would have formulated clause 3, with reference to social circumstances that 
only  superficially resemble events from ʿUmar ibn ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz’ caliphate.
The remarkable expression ‘and we preferred to make the people equal’ 
in al-Fasawī’s variant of the coercion tradition points to another way of 
interpreting the equalitarian concern. The root morpheme of the verb nuwāsī 
(w-s-y) aligns both phonetically and semantically with the corresponding 
morpheme of the word taswiyah (s-w-y) in the soubriquet ahl al-taswiyah (‘the 
advocates of equality’), which was applied to the followers of the literary 
movement known as shuʿūbīyah.60 If clause 3 in the coercion tradition implies 
a shuʿūbī tenor, it most likely refers to the early decades of the ʿAbbāsid cali-
phate (c. 132–195/750–810), when followers of the shuʿūbīyah were calling 
for equality between the mawālī and the Arabs.61 Later on, perhaps in the 
wake of the civil war (195–8/810–13) between al-Amīn and al-Maʾmūn, in 
which the latter’s Khurāsānī forces defeated the former’s Arab supporters, 
the shuʿūbīyah took on a clear anti-Arab tinge and, as such, it may hardly be 
associated with the equalitarian undertone of clause 3. This chronology sug-
gests that clause 3 was attached to the coercion tradition either by the mawlá 
Maʿmar ibn Rāshid (d. 153/770?) or by his student, the mawlá ʿAbd al-Razzāq 
al-Ṣanʿānī (d. 211/827).62
Conclusion
In the second half of the second century ah,63 ʿAbd al-Razzāq al-Ṣanʿānī 
put into circulation a composite tradition in which Ibn Shihāb al-Zuhrī 
complains that, for all his dislike of the written transmission of knowledge 
(kitāb al-ʿilm), Umayyad amīrs compelled him to commit Tradition to writing. 
Usually interpreted as a witness to the transition from oral communication 
to written record of hadith, the evidence surveyed above suggests that this 
report nevertheless originally related to social and political circumstances 
that are immaterial to the modalities of hadith transmission.
The expression kitāb al-ʿilm (‘writing of knowledge’) in clause 1 of the 
coercion tradition is a reformulation of an original matn, which included the 
word kitāb without additional qualifications. In this case the word kitāb most 
likely meant ‘scripture’. This ‘scriptural concern’ arose c. 84–5/703–4, when 
ʿAbd al-Malik ibn Marwān initiated a project to work out a textually fixed 
and conveniently sectioned version of the Qurʾān. The caliph’s undertaking, 
whose implementation was entrusted to the learned but high-handed gov-
ernor of Iraq, al-Ḥajjāj ibn Yūsuf, elicited objections by al-Zuhrī and other 

 20 ] 
Pavel Pavlovitch
scholars of his time. At first, they denounced the introduction of diacritical 
points (naqṭ) and, possibly, the division of the integral Qurʾānic text into pre-
viously unseen discrete units, sūrahs and āyahs. Ultimately, these early schol-
ars endorsed, grudgingly, the results of ʿAbd al-Malik’s initiative, insofar as 
it guaranteed the hermeneutical unity of scripture, which was of foremost 
importance for its use as a canonical source of Islamic law.
The unqualified use of the word kitāb in al-Zuhrī’s statement became prob-
lematic once the short-lived opposition to ʿAbd al-Malik’s maṣāḥif project had 
petered out, and al-Zuhrī’s words, which at first meant ‘we were averse to 
the scripture’s dotting and arrangement’, came to be understood as implying 
a now inscrutable aversion to scripture per se. To avoid this intolerable con-
notation, ʿAbd al-Razzāq, or his informant, Maʿmar ibn Rāshid, affixed the 
word ʿilm to the word kitāb, thereby asserting, in an anachronistic manner, 
that al-Zuhrī had in mind ‘writing of knowledge’. This semantic shift entailed 
the re-contextualisation of al-Zuhrī’s original expression, which came to be 
associated with the second-century debate on the legitimacy of transmit-
ting hadith in writing. In the early ʿAbbāsid period, the reinterpretation of 
al-Zuhrī’s words also addressed ideological concerns: it not only presents the 
Umayyads as oppressors who cow scholars into obedience but also offsets 
the opprobrium of al-Zuhrī’s rapport with the unholy rulers.
The proposed reinterpretation of the coercion tradition leaves an open 
question. How does al-Zuhrī’s opposition to ʿAbd al-Malik’s codification 
of the Qurʾān relate to al-Zuhrī’s pivotal role in the spreading of traditions 
about the earlier ʿUthmānic codification?64 Conceivably, he may have con-
sidered the two codifications as chronologically separate and substantively 
different historical events. On the other hand, the ʿUthmānic narrative may 
have been al-Zuhrī’s way of oppugning the Umayyad project before eventu-
ally condoning it.
Clause 3 of the coercion tradition implies the politically charged doctrine 
that all Muslims are equal with respect to the acquisition of knowledge. 
Mastery of hadith as a foremost source of legal norms could empower the 
non-Arab converts to Islam who demanded the same fiscal privileges as 
enjoyed by those – for the most part Arabs – who were born Muslims. I am 
inclined to think that this equalitarian concern, even if in tune with events 
in al-Zuhrī’s lifetime, as, for instance, ʿUmar ibn ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz’ policy to 
endorse the fiscal rights of the mawālī converts, was added to the matn after 
al-Zuhrī’s death. As a pure Arab, he would not champion equality between 
mawālī and their Arab overlords. The isnād of the coercion tradition suggests 
ʿAbd al-Razzāq al-Ṣanʿānī or his teacher Maʿmar ibn Rāshid, both of whom 
were mawālī, as the originators of the equalitarian concern, which therefore 
goes back to the second half of the second century ah/767–816 ce.
To conclude the present study, I should note the epistemological advan-
tage of combining isnad-cum-matn analysis with the examination of legal, 
political and exegetical concerns that often underlie the outward formulation 
of Muslim traditions. Whereas isnad-cum-matn analysis is a formal procedure 

  
Kunnā nakrahu al-kitāb 
[ 21
to reconstruct the earliest formulation of a tradition and associate it with a 
common link, form-critical analysis delves into the semantic structure of the 
matn. Semantic strains between its constitutive parts, as well as evolution of 
concepts from vagueness to clarity of expression and allusions to specific life 
settings are all structural marks capable of affording glimpses into the murky 
chapters of the tradition’s history from before its collection, redaction, and 
further transmission by the common link and the partial common links.
Notes
 * 
I would like to thank Professor Gregor Schoeler and Professor Harald Motzki for 
their critical reading of an early draft of this chapter. All errors of fact or opinion 
are the author’s sole responsibility
 1. ʿAbd al-Razzāq, al-Muṣannaf, ed. Ḥabīb al-Raḥmān al-Aʿẓamī, 12 vols (Beirut: al-
Maktab al-Islāmī, 1403/1983), 11:258. To facilitate the analysis, I divide the matn 
into three clauses.
 2. Pavel Pavlovitch, ‘Juynboll, al-Zuhrī, and al-Kitāb: About the Historicity of 
Transmission below the Common Link Level’, in Petra M. Sijpesteijn and Camilla 
Adang (eds), Islam at 250: Studies in Memory of G. H. A. Juynboll (Leiden: Brill, 
2020), 103–29.
 3. For an excellent review of al-Zuhrī’s relationship with the Umayyads, see 
Michael Lecker, ‘Biographical Notes on Ibn Shihāb al-Zuhrī’, Journal of Semitic 
Studies 41 (1996): 24–8.
 4. Gregor Schoeler, ‘Oral Torah and Ḥadīṯ: Transmission, Prohibition of Writing, 
Redaction’, in Gregor Schoeler, The Oral and Written in Early Islam, ed. James 
E. Montgomery, trans. Uwe Vagelpohl, Routledge Studies in Middle Eastern 
Literatures, 13 (London: Routledge, 2006), 123–4; cf. Michael Cook, ‘The 
Opponents of the Writing of Tradition in Early Islam’, Arabica 44 (1997): 459–61, 
§§ 37–41.
 5. Cook, ‘Opponents’, 486, § 96.
 6. Schoeler, ‘Torah’, 123. Maʿmar was also critical of al-Zuhrī’s practices as a hadith 
transmitter (Lecker, ‘Biographical Notes’, 29).
 7. Meir J. Kister, ‘… Lā taqraʾū l-qurʾāna ʿalā l-muṣḥafiyyīna wa-lā taḥmilū l-ʿilma ʿani 
l-ṣaḥafiyyīn . . . Some Notes on the Transmission of Ḥadīth’, Jerusalem Studies in 
Arabic and Islam 22 (1998): 159.
 8. Kister, ‘… Lā taqraʾū l-qurʾāna, 158–9.
 9. G. H. A. Juynboll, Muslim Tradition (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1983), 17ff.
10. Abū ʿUbayd, Kitāb al-Amwāl, ed. Muḥammad ʿAmārah (Beirut: Dār al-Shurūq, 
1409/1989), 686–8, Nos 1849–50.
11. Ibn Abī Khaythamah, al-Tārīkh al-kabīr, ed. Ṣalāḥ ibn Fatḥī Halal, 4 vols (Cairo: 
al-Fārūq al-Ḥadīthah, 1424/2004), 2:247.
12. Ibn Saʿd, al-Ṭabaqāt. Al-Qism al-mutammim, ed. Ziyād Muḥammad Manṣūr, 
Silsilat iḥyā’ al-turāth 6 (Medina: Maktabat al-ʿUlūm wa-al-Ḥikam, 1408/1987), 
453.

 22 ] 
Pavel Pavlovitch
13. Al-Fasawī, al-Maʿrifah wa-al-tārīkh, ed. Akram Ḍiyāʾ al-ʿUmarī, 3rd edn, 4 
vols, (Medina: Maktabat al-Dār, 1410), 1:632 (one scribe); Abū Nuʿaym, Ḥilyat 
al-awliyāʾ, 10 vols (Cairo: Maktabat al-Khānjī, 1932–8, repr. 1416/1996), 3:361 
(two scribes).
14. Al-Fasawī, Maʿrifah 1:640.
15. Abū Nuʿaym, Ḥilyat 3:363. Ibn ʿAsākir (d. 571/1176) cites what seems to be a lit-
erarily embellished variant of the same tradition, based on an isnād that includes 
none of the transmitters cited by Abū Nuʿaym: Ibn ʿAsākir, Tārīkh Madīnat 
Dimashq, ed. ʿUmar ibn Gharāmah al-ʿAmrawī, 80 vols (Beirut: Dār al-Fikr, 
1415–21/1995–2000), 55:333.
16. Nabia Abbott, Studies in Arabic Literary Papyri, vol. 2: Qurʾānic Commentary and 
Tradition (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1967), 32.
17. Schoeler, ‘Torah’, 124.
18. Ibn Abī Dāwūd, Kitāb al-Maṣāḥif, ed. Muḥibb al-Dīn ʿAbd al-Sabḥān Wāʿiẓ, 2 vols 
(Beirut: Dār al-Bashāʾir al-Islāmīyah, 1423/2002), 1:151–69.
19. I take for a terminus post quem the promulgation of al-Shāfiʿī’s teaching that the 
Sunnah and the Qurʾān are two varieties of revelation, formulated in his Risālah 
towards the end of the second century ah. Given that Abū ʿUbayd does not seem 
to have been acquainted with this teaching, and that the Risālah as we know it may 
date to the third quarter of the ninth century ce (Christopher Melchert, ‘Qurʾānic 
Abrogation across the Ninth Century: Shāfiʿī, Abū ʿUbayd, Muḥāsibī, and Ibn 
Qutaybah’, in Bernard G. Weiss (ed.), Studies in Islamic Legal Theory, Islamic Law 
and Society, 15 (Leiden: Brill, 2002), 84–6, 96), Ibn Abī Khaythamah’s tradition 
may have come into being about twenty-five years after Abū ʿUbayd’s death.
20. Al-Mizzī, Tahdhīb al-Kamāl, ed. Bashshār ʿAwwād Maʿrūf, 35 vols (Beirut: 
Muʾassasat al-Risālah, 1983/1403), 20:245.
21. Estimated date of birth from al-Khaṭīb al-Baghdādī, Tārīkh Baghdād, 14 vols 
(Cairo: Maktabat al-Khānjī, 1349/1931), 12:416.
22. ʿUqayl preferred transmission from memory (ḥifẓ), but he also reportedly pos-
sessed a book with al-Zuhrī’s traditions (al-Mizzī, Tahdhīb 20:244–5).
23. Abū ʿUbayd, Amwāl, 458, No. 936. At the end of tradition No. 1 above (= Abū 
ʿUbayd No. 1850), which does not mention the family of ʿUmar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb, 
Abū ʿUbayd states that it forms one matn with tradition No. 936, which asserts 
that the alms tax rules were part of a document preserved by ʿUmar’s family. 
If the two traditions were one narrative unit, or even if Abū ʿUbayd tried to 
knit them together, this is a witness to an attempt to present al-Zuhrī’s alms-tax 
tradition (No. 1850) as embodying a legal practice that had been established 
decades before al-Zuhrī’s birth (No. 936). Note that tradition No. 936 has its 
match in the Muwaṭṭaʾ of Mālik, rec. Yaḥyá ibn Yaḥyá, al-zakāh 11, ṣadaqāt 
al-māshiyah, which, tellingly, adduces ʿUmar’s letter about the alms tax without 
citing intermediate authorities and without associating it with the Prophet, 
as Abū ʿUbayd does. Schacht was certainly right to consider the latter tradi-
tion as an exemplary instance of spreading isnāds (Joseph Schacht, Origins 
of Muhammadan Jurisprudence (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1950), 167; cf. Ignaz 
Goldziher, Muhammedanische Studien, 2 vols (Halle a. S., 1889–90), 2:51–2).

  
Kunnā nakrahu al-kitāb 
[ 23
24. Juynboll, Muslim Tradition, 24–5.
25. I deduce this dating from reports that towards 179/795 Abū ʿUbayd had arrived 
in Basra, where, as noted by Gottschalk, he already behaved as a ‘self-confident 
young scholar’ (Hans Gottschalk, ‘Abū ʿUbaid al-Qāsim b. Sallām. Studie zur 
Geschichte der arabischen Biographie’, Der Islam 23 (1936): 269).
26. Even al-Mizzī, who meticulously collected biographical reports, produced only a 
few lines about Saʿīd ibn Ziyād (Tahdhīb 10:441).
27. Al-ʿUqaylī, Kitāb al-Ḍuʿafāʾ, ed. Māzin ibn Muḥammad al-Sarsāwī, 7 vols 
(Cairo: Maktabat Dār Ibn ʿAbbās, 1429/2008), 5:296–300. Ibn Ḥibbān describes 
Muḥammad ibn ʿAbd Allāh as someone who had a bad memory, committed 
many mistakes and erred when transmitting from his uncle (Ibn Ḥibbān, Kitāb 
al-Majrūḥīn, ed. Ḥamdī ʿAbd al-Majīd ibn Ismāʿīl al-Salafī, 2 vols [Riyadh: Dār 
al-Ṣumayʿī, 1420/2000], 2:258).
28. Al-Mizzī, Tahdhīb 25:558.
29. Al-Mizzī, Tahdhīb 2:92; Ibn Ḥajar, Tahdhīb 1:122.
30. Ibn Abī Ḥātim, al-Jarḥ wa-al-taʿdīl, 9 vols (Hyderabad: Jamʿīyat Dāʾirat al-Maʿārif 
al-ʿUthmānīyah, 1360–71, repr. Beirut: Dār Iḥyāʾ al-Turāth al-ʿArabī, n.d.), 9:57 
(Hishām); al-Mizzī, Tahdhīb 10:350–1 (Saʿīd). About the negative connotation of 
ṣadūq, see Juynboll, Muslim Tradition, 183–8.
31. Ibn Ḥibbān, Kitāb al-Thiqāt, ed. Muḥammad ʿAbd al-Muʾīd Khān, 10 vols 
(Hyderabad: Maṭbaʿat Majlis Dāʾirat al-Maʿārif al-ʿUthmānīyah, 1393–
1403/1973–83), 5:190; cf. al-Mizzī, Tahdhīb 32:318.
32. Khalīfah ibn Khayyāṭ, Kitāb al-Ṭabaqāt, ed. Akram Ḍiyāʾ al-ʿUmarī (Baghdad: 
Maṭbaʿat al-ʿĀnī, 1387/1967), 207.
33. Ibn Saʿd, Kitāb al-Ṭabaqāt al-kabīr, ed. ʿAlī Muḥammad ʿUmar, 11 vols (Cairo: 
Maktabat al-Khānjī, 1421/2001), 8:278.
34. According to Ibn Ḥanbal, Abū al-Malīḥ’s transmission from al-Zuhrī was con-
fused (muḍṭarib): al-Mizzī, Tahdhīb 6:282.
35. Ibn ʿAsākir, Tārīkh 55:333.
36. Ibn Abī Khaythamah, Tārīkh 2:251, No. 2728.
37. Al-Dārimī, al-Musnad, ed. Ḥusayn Salīm Asad al-Dārānī, 4 vols (Riyadh: Dār 
al-Mughnī, 1421/2000), 1:414.
38. About Ibn Sīrīn, see Ibn Ḥanbal, Kitāb al-ʿIlal wa-maʿrifat al-rijāl, ed. Waṣī Allāh 
ibn Muḥammad ʿAbbās, 4 vols, 2nd edn (Riyadh: Dār al-Khānī, 1422/2001), 
1:245; 2:392. At 2:393, Ibn Ḥanbal adds the explanation that by kitāb Ibn Sīrīn 
meant kitāb al-ʿilm. The possible understanding of yakrahu al-kitāb as ‘he was 
averse to (written/codified/a project to codify) scripture’ bothered Ibn Ḥanbal 
no less than it bothered those transmitters of the coercion tradition who sub-
jected it to the same change, without, however, acknowledging their interven-
tion. About Qatādah, see al-Dārimī, Musnad 1:412. Al-Dārimī uses the expression 
kāna yakrahu al-kitābah, but in his next clause, kāna al-Awzāʿī yakrahuhu, the singu-
lar masculine form of the anaphoric referent -hu betrays that the original form 
was kitāb, not kitābah.
39. Al-Dārimī, Musnad 1:412.
40. Omar Hamdan, ‘The Second Maṣāḥif Project: a Step towards the Canonization of 

 24 ] 
Pavel Pavlovitch
the Qurʾānic Text’, in Angelika Neuwirth, Nicolai Sinai and Michael Marx (eds), 
The Qurʾān in Context, Texts and Studies on the Qurʾān, 6 (Leiden: Brill, 2010), 
800, 807ff.
41. Hamdan, ‘Second Maṣāḥif Project’, 801.
42. For a list of opponents, see Ibn Abī Dāwūd, Maṣāḥif 2:521–5, Nos 445–60.
43. About al-Nakhaʿī, see ʿAbd al-Razzāq, Muṣannaf 4:322; Ibn Abī Dāwūd, 
Maṣāḥif 2:525, Nos 458–9; al-Dānī, al-Muḥkam fī naqṭ al-maṣāḥif, ed. ʿIzzat Ḥasan 
(Damascus: Dār al-Fikr, 1418/1997), 11. About Ibn Sīrīn, see Ibn Abī Dāwūd, 
Maṣāḥif 2:522–4, Nos 448–53, and al-Dānī, Muḥkam, 11. About Qatādah, see Ibn 
Abī Dāwūd, Maṣāḥif 2:524–5, Nos 454–7.
44. Hamdan, ‘Second Maṣāḥif Project’, 807–9.
45. Hamdan, ‘Second Maṣāḥif Project’, 817.
46. Abū ʿUbayd, Gharīb al-ḥadīth, ed. Ḥusayn Muḥammad Muḥammad Sharaf, 5 
vols (Cairo: al-Hayʾah al-ʿĀmmah li-Shuʾūn al-Maṭābiʿ al-Amīrīyah, 1424/1984), 
5:121.
47. Al-Ḥasan al-Baṣrī is credited with the introduction of the basmalah at the begin-
ning of the sūrahs and the insertion of a dividing line between each two sūrahs 
(Hamdan, ‘Second Maṣāḥif Project’, 815–16). The evidence of Qurʾān manuscripts 
from the last decades of the first century ah, however, contradicts the message 
of the literary sources. For the most part, these manuscripts lack diacritics and 
orthoepic signs; even when used, such signs do not appear in places where they 
could alleviate difficult readings (François Déroche, Qurʾans of the Umayyads, 
Leiden Studies in Islam and Society, 1 [Leiden: Brill, 2013], 35, 71–2).
48. Al-Farāhīdī, Kitāb al-ʿAyn, ed. ʿAbd al-Ḥamīd Hindāwī, 4 vols (Beirut: Dār al-
Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 1424/2003), 4:8, s.v. k-t-b; Lane, Dictionary, s.v. k-t-b.
49. Abū ʿUbayd, Gharīb 5:121.
50. Hamdan, ‘Second Maṣāḥif Project’, 823–4. About the existence of diverse records 
of revelation, some of which lay in the background of al-Ḥajjāj’s recension while 
others were deliberately excluded from it, see Alfred-Louis de Prémare, ‘ʿAbd 
al-Malik b. Marwān and the Process of the Qurʾān’s Composition’, in Karl-Heinz 
Ohlig and Gerd-R. Puin (eds), The Hidden Origins of Islam: New Research into Its 
Early History (New York: Prometheus Books, 2010), 204–5.
51. Pavel Pavlovitch, The Formation of the Islamic Understanding of Kalāla in the 
Second Century ah (718–816 ce): Between Scripture and Canon, Islamic History and 
Civilization, Studies and Texts, 126 (Leiden: Brill, 2016), 368–75.
52. Al-Fasawī, Maʿrifah 1:633.
53. Kister, ‘Lā taqraʾū’, 160–2.
54. Gerald R. Hawting, The First Dynasty of Islam: the Umayyad Caliphate ad 661–750, 
2nd edn (London: Routledge, 2000), 70.
55. Hawting, The First Dynasty of Islam, 80–1. The terms jizyah and kharāj were 
applied with considerable overlap in the first century, denoting a tax in general 
levied on the conquered population. See Encyclopaedia of Islam, 2nd edn (EI2), s.v. 
‘djizya’, by Cl. Cahen.
56. Vacillation between encouragement of local people to accept Islam and the need 
to keep a steady flow of revenue to the local and central authorities engendered 

  
Kunnā nakrahu al-kitāb 
[ 25
sustained social tension in the eastern provinces of the caliphate during the final 
decades of Umayyad rule (Hawting, First Dynasty, 85–6, 95). While acknowledg-
ing this fact, Juda has argued that ʿAbd al-Malik ibn Marwān and ʿUmar ibn ʿAbd 
al-ʿAzīz tried to prevent drying out of tax revenues by imposing a land tax (jizyah, 
jizyat arḍ, kharāj) on both Arabs and mawālī in Iraq and Greater Syria (Jamal Juda, 
‘The Economic Status of the Mawālī in Early Islam’, in Monique Bernards and 
John Nawas (eds), Patronate and Patronage in Early and Classical Islam, Islamic 
History and Civilization, Studies and Texts, 61 (Leiden: Brill, 2005), 271–3).
57. Abbott, Studies in Arabic Literary Papyri 2:15–16. On the role of the mawālī in early 
Islamic sciences, see further John Nawas and Monique Bernards, ‘A Preliminary 
Report on the Netherlands Ulama Project (NUP): the Evolution of the Class of 
ʿUlamāʾ in Islam with Special Emphasis on the Non-Arab Converts (Mawālī) from 
the First through Fourth Century ah’, in U. Vermeulen and J. M. F. van Reeth 
(eds), Law, Christianity and Modernism in Islamic Society, Analecta Lovaniensi 
analecta, 86 (Leuven: Peeters, 1998), 97–107; Harald Motzki, ‘The Role of Non-
Arab Converts in the Development of Early Islamic Law’, Islamic Law and Society 
6 (1999): 293–317; G. H. A. Juynboll, ‘The Role of Non-Arabs, the mawālī, in the 
Early Development of Muslim Ḥadīth’, Le Muséon 118 (2005): 355–86; ‘P. Crone, 
‘Mawlā’, EI2. Notwithstanding their disagreements, the authors of these studies 
clearly show that the mawālī played a significant role in the development of early 
Islamic sciences. About the tense relationship between Arabs and mawālī in the 
reign of Yazīd ibn ʿAbd al-Mālik (101–5/720–4), see Christian C. Sahner, ‘The 
First Iconoclasm in Islam: a New History of the Edict of Yazīd II (ah 104/ad 723)’, 
Der Islam 94 (2017): 36.
58. Al-Zuhrī had a strong bias (taʿaṣṣub) against transmitting on the authority of 
mawālī (al-Balkhī, Qabūl al-akhbār, ed. al-Ḥusaynī ibn ʿUmar ibn ʿAbd al-Raḥīm, 
2 vols [Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 1421/2000], 1:269). He would dispense 
with mawālī informants in favour of the children of emigrants and helpers 
(al-Fasawī, Maʿrifah, 1:641).
59. Al-Ḥākim al-Naysābūrī, Maʿrifat ʿulūm al-ḥadīth, ed. al-Sayyid Muʿaẓẓam 
Ḥusayn, 2nd edn (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 1397/1977), 198–9.
60. Goldziher, Muhammedanische Studien 1:146, 165; Roy P. Mottahedeh, ‘The 
Shuʿûbîyah Controversy and the Social History of Early Islamic Iran’, International 
Journal of Middle East Studies 7 (1976): 164.
61. The history of the shuʿūbīyah is difficult to follow in detail, but this chronol-
ogy may be inferred from the floruit of the early shuʿūbīs listed by Mottahedeh 
(‘Controversy’) and Susanne Enderwitz (EI2, s.v. ‘shuʿūbiyya’), as well as from 
Goldziher’s chronological references (Muhammedanische Studien 1:147ff., esp. 
160–3, 195–207). See also Sarah Bowen Savant, ‘Naming Shuʿūbīs’, in Alireza 
Korangy et al. (eds), Essays in Islamic Philology, History, and Philosophy (Berlin: De 
Gruyter, 2016), 171–6.
62. ʿAbd al-Razzāq transmitted from Maʿmar ibn Rāshid a tradition that served 
the interests of the Nabateans by stating that ʿAlī himself was of Nabatean 
origin (Goldziher, Muhammedanische Studien 1:157). The mawlā al-Aʿmash (d. 
148/765?) is remembered as having reproached the mawlā Shuʿbah ibn al-Ḥajjāj 

 26 ] 
Pavel Pavlovitch
(82–160/701–76) for teaching hadith to the masses with the words ‘Woe to 
you, Shuʿbah! Do not hang pearls around the necks of the swine!’ (Ibn al-Jaʿd, 
Musnad, ed. ʿĀmir Aḥmad Ḥaydar [Beirut: Muʾassasat Nādir, 1417/1996, repr. 
Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 1417/1996], 129). Al-Aʿmash used the same expression 
to scorn a party (qawm) from al-Wāsiṭ who asked him to relate hadith (al-ʿIjlī, 
Maʿrifat al-thiqāt, ed. ʿAbd al-ʿAlīm ʿAbd al-ʿAẓīm al-Bastawī, 2 vols [Medina: 
Maktabat al-Dār, 1405/1985], 1:432). These reports suggest that disputes over 
the possibility of sharing hadith with wide audiences may have begun either 
towards the end of al-Zuhrī’s lifetime or some time thereafter.
63. This chronology is based on the assumption that ʿAbd al-Razzāq received the 
scriptural part of the tradition from Maʿmar ibn Rāshid in the Yemen. Although 
Maʿmar’s arrival in the Yemen cannot be dated with precision, the sources 
give the impression that he spent the last decade of his life there (Pavlovitch, 
Formation, 195, n. 53).
64. Harald Motzki, ‘The Collection of the Qurʾān: a Reconsideration of Western 
Views in Light of Recent Methodological Developments’, Der Islam 78 (2001): 
28–31.

 [ 27 ]
CHAPTER
2
The History of the AdhA
¯n: 
a View from the Hadith Literature
Maroussia Bednarkiewicz*
In most hadith collections, there are narratives concerned with the so-called 
beginning of the adhān, badʾ al-adhān or badʾ al-nidāʾ. They recount the intro-
duction of the Islamic call to prayer and explain how Muslims, inspired by 
Jewish and Christian practices, developed their own ritual. The history of 
the adhān and its introduction raises numerous questions. Why and how was 
the Islamic call to prayer introduced? What role did Jewish and Christian 
rituals play? Was there a development phase or was it always the same set 
of chanted formulae? Who were the people interested in the history of its 
introduction and why did they narrate it?
Using close textual analysis and recent methodological development in 
hadith studies, I have reconstructed a potential common structure underly-
ing all the texts, which I have called the ‘proto-narrative’. The results of my 
research show that the narrators and transmitters used this proto-narrative 
to construct different narratives, variously intertwining historical facts with 
oneiric traditions, disguised political statements or religious claims. Often, 
we can identify the characteristics of transmission processes by certain narra-
tors or collectors. Systematic analysis of the primary sources was performed 
with the help of network visualisation tools to produce data-dense graphs of 
transmission, unfolding in time and space. The results of the present research 
contribute to a better understanding of the birth of the Islamic call to prayer 
at the time of the Prophet and its cultural implications for the following 
decades. They also shed light on the mechanisms employed in some of the 
narratives to promote different viewpoints.
General Outline
When the narratives concerned with the introduction of the adhān are put 
together, it appears clearly that they all follow the same storyline despite 
their numerous differences: at some point Muslims felt the need to develop 

 28 ] 
Maroussia Bednarkiewicz
their call to prayer. They thought about, or used, the Jewish trumpet or the 
Christian semantron, before someone suggested a call to prayer consisting of 
chanted formulae. The accounts narrating the introduction of the adhān can 
be divided into three different categories in terms of content (matn) and chain 
of transmitters (isnād). The first category contains narratives attributed to Ibn 
ʿUmar that are present in almost all the main hadith collections. Its peculiar-
ity is the preponderant role it attributes to ʿUmar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb. The second 
category encompasses narratives allegedly narrated by Anas ibn Mālik. It 
is present in only three collections of hadith and characteristically suggests 
lighting a fire to indicate the time of the prayers. It mentions the iqāmah, 
the second call to prayer, along with the adhān. The third category is more 
complex: its chains of transmission are divided into many branches and the 
story narrated displays more details, its distinctive feature being the descrip-
tion of a dream as divine inspiration for the establishment of the adhān. These 
categories will be called, respectively, categories 1, 2 and 3, also abbreviated 
C1, C2 and C3.
The Sources
The texts narrating the introduction of the adhān were extracted from hadith 
collections and historical treatises. In order to facilitate the presentation of 
the large amount of information obtained through the close analysis of this 
material, I have usually limited the sources presented here to the third/ninth 
century. However, I shall mention later materials as well when relevant. 
Table 2.1 lists the main primary sources and the additional later materials in 
chronological order, with the number of narratives they contain for each of 
the category C1, C2 and C3:
Category 1
The first category encompasses six reports gathered in the collections of ʿAbd 
al-Razzāq, al-Bukhārī, Muslim, al-Tirmidhī, Ibn Mājah and Ibn Ḥanbal.1 The 
reports are almost identical, with only slight lexical differences. The text 
below highlights these differences in bold, separated by slashes:
ْمُهُضْعَب َلاَقَف َكِلَذ يِف اًمْوَي اوُمَّلَكَتَف اهب/اَهَل ىَداَنُي َسْيَل ،َةَلاَّصلا َنوُنَّيَحَتَيَف َنوُعِمَتْجَي َةَنيِدَمْلا اوُمِدَق َنيِح َنوُمِلْسُمْلا َناَك 
َنوُثَعْبَت َلاَوَأ ُرَمُع َلاَقَف   ِدوُهَيْلا ِنْرَق َلْثِم انرق/اًقوُب ]ْلَب/اوُذِخَّتا] ْمُهُضْعَب َلاَقَو   ىَراَصَّنلا ِسوُقاَن َلْثِم اًسوُقاَن اوُذِخَّتا 
ِةَلاَّصلاِب نِّذَأف/ِداَنَف ْمُق ُلَلاِب اَي  ملسو هيلع الله ىلص َِّالله ُلوُسَر َلاَقَف  ِةَلاَّصلاِب يِداَنُي ًلاُجَر
When the Muslims arrived at Medina, they used to assemble for the prayer, 
without there being any call to/for it [the prayer]. Once they discussed this. 
Some people suggested the use of a nāqūs like the nāqūs of the Christians, others 
proposed a būq/qarn like the būq/qarn [horn] used by the Jews, but ʿUmar said, 
‘Would you send a man to call [people to gather] for the prayer?’ Then the 
Messenger of God . . . said, ‘Bilāl, stand up and call/chant the adhān for prayer.’2

  
The History of the Adhān 
[ 29
Chains of Transmission
I have displayed the transmission chains of these narratives in a diagram, 
taking into consideration time and space beside the transmission paths 
(Figure 2.1). Each horizontal stripe represents a lapse of twenty-five years. 
The transmitters are arranged according to the reported dates of their death. 
Transmitters who are linked to a specific city have been circled with a line 
representing their respective cities. Figure 2.1 shows that the story gained 
popularity from the first half of the third/ninth century onwards. This 
means that the main foci of the narratives are likely to reflect the concerns of 
the generations of these times. Speech bubbles have been added to indicate 
the lexical modifications introduced by ʿAbd al-Razzāq.
Starting in Medina with Ibn ʿUmar (d. 74/693–4?) and Nāfiʿ (d. 117/735–
6?), the first category of narratives moved initially southwards towards 
Mecca (Ibn Jurayj, d. 150/767?) and then northwards mainly to Baghdad, 
where many of the transmitters were active: Ḥajjāj ibn Muḥammad (d. 
206/821–2), Abū Bakr ibn Abī al-Naḍr (d. 245/859–60), Hārūn ibn ʿAbd 
Allāh (d. 243/858) and Maḥmūd ibn Ghaylān (d. 249/864?). We have here 
one of these complex cases that can fall into Haider and Sadeghi’s cat-
egory of accounts linked to multiple locations and without clear traces of 
Table 2.1 Primary sources and the number of narratives they contain for 
each category
Sources: third/ninth century
C1
C2
C3
Mālik ibn Anas, Muwaṭṭaʾ
1
al-Ṭayālisī, Musnad
1
ʿAbd al-Razzāq, Muṣannaf 
1
2
Ibn Hishām, al-Sīrah
2
Ibn Saʿd, Kitāb al-Ṭabaqāt al-Kabīr
3
al-Bukhārī, Ṣaḥīḥ
1
2
Muslim, Ṣaḥīḥ
1
2
Abū Dāwud, Sunan
5
Tirmidhī, Jāmiʿ
1
1
Ibn Mājah, Sunan
2
Ibn Ḥanbal, Musnad
3
Ibn Abī Shaybah, Muṣannaf
1
Dārimī, Sunan
1
Fourth–fifth/tenth–eleventh century
Nasāʾī, Sunan
1
Ibn Khuzaymah, Ṣaḥīḥ
1
Ibn Ḥibban, Ṣaḥīḥ
1
al-Nuʿmān, Kitāb al-Īḍāḥ
1
Ibn Bābawayh, Kitāb man lā yaḥḍuruhu al-faqīh
1
al-Bayhaqī, Sunan
1
1
2

 30 ] 
Maroussia Bednarkiewicz
regionalism.3 The lexical and thematic analyses below confirm the informa-
tion  provided by the asānīd.
Lexical Discrepancies
There are three kinds of lexical discrepancies in the narratives of C1:
1. insignificant differences without impact on the meaning;
2. qarn and būq;
3. adhān and nidāʾ.
The first lexical difference is between the prepositions li and bi, and may be 
explained either as a copyist’s mistake, or simply the narrator or compiler’s 
choice since the two prepositions in the sentence have the same meaning. 
The same may be said about the repetition of ittakhidhū in al-Tirmidhī’s 
recension or the particle bal which is not present in Muslim’s version. The 
repetition seems to be a rhythmic addition without consequence for the 
meaning. As for the particle, it adds a nuance, which could be translated 
Figure 2.1 Chains of transmitters for C1

  
The History of the Adhān 
[ 31
as ‘rather’. It may also be considered an empty word that can be ignored 
without affecting the general meaning of the sentence. Muslim is again 
the one narrating a different version without bal. Such lexical discrepancies 
highlight the fact that perfect verbatim transmission is rare and the following 
examples suggest that it might not have been a priority or major concern 
among transmitters.
The second kind of lexical discrepancies concern the Jewish trumpet. 
Since Jews were using different kinds of horns and trumpets, it was possible 
to confuse them. Nevertheless, most transmitters of C1 seem to be familiar 
with the Jewish instrument qeren (Hebrew ןֶרֶק, Aram. qǝran ןרק qarnā אנרק, 
Arab. qarn نرق), as they use its Arabic equivalent without feeling the need 
to explain its meaning.4 Also, the word būq (from the Greek βωχάνη or Latin 
buccina) does not appear to describe any of the Jewish horn-like instruments. 
The question is therefore where and why būq occurs in the recensions of ʿAbd 
al-Razzāq and al-Bukhārī. I see three possible explanations: (1) a transmis-
sion error on written notes of the report occurred on the two final letters of 
qarn and būq: rāʾ/wāw and nūn/qāf; (2) ʿAbd al-Razzāq aimed to avoid the 
Hebrew word or he was addressing an audience more familiar with būq than 
with qarn; (3) finally, language usage evolved in some regions and būq started 
replacing there the word qarn, as in the Yemen, where ʿAbd al-Razzāq was 
active.5
This particular type of terminological discrepancy in a small set of hadith 
reports shows the precedence given to meaning over literality. Verbatim 
transmission was not only difficult, but also not the priority, and al-Bukhārī 
gives a clear example for that: he chose to create a hybrid version of the 
recensions he received from Ḥajjāj ibn Muḥammad (with the repetition of 
qarn) and Maḥmūd ibn Ghaylān (with the repetition of būq), but he did not 
deem it necessary to provide justification for his choice, probably because it 
did not affect the general meaning.
The last lexical discrepancy concerns the use of two different words to 
describe the call to prayer: adhān and nidāʾ. All the narratives except one 
contain the phrase yunādī bi-al-ṣalāh, ‘to call to prayer’. The verb nādá is the 
Qurʾānic word used to describe the call to prayer.6 It shows that the early 
Muslims called to prayer without having an official term and an established 
ritual for it. The word adhān also appears in Qurʾān 9:3 to designate an 
announcement from God through the Prophet. The evolution from nidāʾ to 
adhān reveals how a simple means to call to prayer was transformed into a 
divine announcement and thus a religious ritual.7 This was helped by the 
influence of Jews and Christians, who possessed developed religious rituals 
and sacred sounds.8 While the adhān was surely not introduced as such over-
night, it must have come about before significant divisions split the Muslim 
community, so that all Muslims could agree on its definition and adopt a 
common name to describe it. That several narratives insist on a role played 
by ʿUmar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb in the introduction of the adhān raises the question 
of whether or not he played a role in this process.

 32 ] 
Maroussia Bednarkiewicz
ʿUmar’s Role
In C1, it is ʿUmar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb (d. 23/644) who introduced the new Islamic 
ritual to call Muslims to prayer. The narratives of the other two catego-
ries do not attribute such a role to ʿUmar. This inconsistency suggests that 
ʿUmar’s involvement could have been apocryphal. Many people could 
have had reasons to create a strong bond between ʿUmar and the adhān: 
his descendants during his caliphate (r. 13–23/634–44) to enhance his pres-
tige as religious leader or later on, his supporters under the Umayyads in 
order to justify his position as religious and political authority, or under the 
ʿAbbāsids as counter-propaganda against the new authorities.9 Although 
there are no solid grounds to doubt ʿUmar’s involvement, it is likely that 
his role was exaggerated by certain narrators of C1. According to some 
sources, the caliph ʿUthmān (r. 23–35/644–55) introduced modifications to 
the adhān.10 It is therefore possible that his predecessor tried to harmonise the 
ritual, without success, and sought support in such narratives as C1’s.
The Shiʿi adhān brings forth one more argument in this hypothesis: its 
difference is more likely to have been a reaction to a Companion’s decision 
than to a Prophetic tradition since the Shiʿa only separated themselves from 
the rest of the community after Muḥammad’s death. In fact, the adhān or the 
proto-adhān was probably introduced when the Muslim community had not 
split yet and could agree easily on a common ritual. After the disappear-
ance of the unifying leader, several schisms occurred. As a result, it became 
increasingly difficult to establish new consensus between the different fac-
tions. The Shiʿi adhān was likely to be a response to ʿUmar’s preference for a 
certain practice of the adhān. The narratives of C1, which are more concerned 
with ʿUmar’s role than with the formulae of the adhān for instance, must have 
started circulating during the reign of the second caliph or slightly after, at 
the time of Ibn ʿUmar. Over time, it was certainly modified. The natural bias 
of any eye-witness, the bias of memories and ‘memories of memories’ as well 
as the actual purpose and the contemporary needs all partake in creating the 
narratives we have now.11
Category 2
The second category contains only four narratives from the collections of 
al-Bukhārī and Muslim.12 Both collectors mention two recensions with the 
same single strand, which then spread out in different branches.
Al-Bukhārī 10/1.1
َةَماَقِلإا َرِتوُي ْنَأَو َناَذَلأا َعَفْشَي ْنَأ ٌلَلاِب َرِمُأَف ىَراَصَّنلاَو َدوُهَيْلا اوُرَكَذَف َسوُقاَّنلاَو َراَّنلا اوُرَكَذ َلاَق
Al-Bukhārī 10/2.2
َرِمُأَف اًسوُقاَن اوُبِرْضَي ْوَأ اًراَن اوُروُي ْنَأ اوُرَكَذَف ُهَنوُفِرْعَي ٍءْىَشِب ةولصلا َتْقَو اوُمَلْعَي ْنَأ اوُرَكَذ َلاَق ُساَّنلا َرُثَك اَّمَل َلاَق 
َةَماَقِلإا َرِتوُي ْنَأَو َناَذَلأا َعَفْشَي ْنَأ ٌلَلاِب

  
The History of the Adhān 
[ 33
Muslim 4/2.3
َعَفْشَي ْنَأ ٌلَلاِب َرِمُأَف اًسوُقاَن اوُبِرْضَي ْوَأ اًراَن اوُرِّوَنُي ْنَأ اوُرَكَذَف ُهَنوُفِرْعَي ٍءْىَشِب ِةَلاَّصلا َتْقَو اوُمَلْعَي ْنَأ اوُرَكَذ َلاَق 
َةَماَقِلإا َرِتوُي ْنَأَو َناَذَلأا
Muslim 4/2.4
َعَفْشَي ْنَأ ٌلَلاِب َرِمُأَف اًسوُقاَن اوُبِرْضَي ْنَأ اوُرَكَذَف ُهَنوُفِرْعَي ٍءْىَشِب ةولصلا َتْقَو اوُمَلْعَي ْنَأ اوُرَكَذ َلاَق ُساَّنلا َرُثَك اَّمَل َلاَق 
َةَماَقِلإا َرِتوُي ْنَأَو َناَذَلأا
English translation (the parts that differ are in italic; the parts that are common 
are in bold): When people increased in number they discussed the question as to how to 
know the time for the prayer by some familiar means. They suggested that a fire be lit 
or that a nāqūs be struck. They mentioned the Jews and Christians. Bilāl was ordered 
to pronounce the wording of the adhān twice and of the iqāmah once.13
The narratives can be divided into two parts: the introductions, which vary 
from one narrative to the other; and the conclusion, which is the same for 
each narrative and is also found alone in other hadith collections (see in 
Figure 2.2 the links which are not in bold). The asānīd of the aḥādīth narrating 
the conclusion indicate that this part was circulating mainly in Basra.
Figure 2.2 gathers the chains of transmission of the four narratives under 
Figure 2.2 Chains of transmitters for umira bilāl an yashfaʿ …

 34 ] 
Maroussia Bednarkiewicz
examination here. Transmitters and links are highlighted in bold, while the 
other simple links lead to the other narratives containing the conclusion only. 
Transmitters from Basra are circled with a thick stroke. The isnād-chains do 
not reach to the Prophet but to Anas ibn Mālik (d. 93/711–12).14 This might 
indicate that the narrative started at the time of Abū Qilābah (d. 104/722–3?), 
who relied on Anas as a Companion to address the issue of concern in these 
narratives: the right number of repetitions for both the adhān and the iqāmah, 
that is, a ritual or fiqh question.15 The introduction narrating the historical 
development of the adhān has then been added by some transmitters in 
al-Bukhārī’s and Muslim’s versions of the narrative. In the black speech 
bubbles pertaining to the chains of transmissions of C2’s narratives, Figure 
2.3 shows which part was potentially added by which transmitter.
We observe here the creation of hybrid narratives which combine the his-
torical introduction with the theological conclusion. This latter part reflects 
debates in Basra about the number of repetitions of the formulae in the calls 
to prayer. Abū Qilābah supported those defending two repetitions of the 
takbīr instead of the four advocated by others and adduced a maxim that he 
attributed to Anas ibn Mālik. Presumably, Khālid al-Ḥadhdhāʾ merged the 
Figure 2.3 Chains of transmitters for C2

  
The History of the Adhān 
[ 35
theological with the historical parts. Later narrators transmitted his hybrid 
version in their own way, probably orally if we consider the level of varia-
tions, rendering its gist more than its exact wording. One of the most striking 
variations is the mention of the fire.
Fire
I see three possible ways to explain the presence of fire in this second 
category:
1. Similar to būq and qarn, a lexical error occurred. A transmitter was 
unable to read the word būq and thought it was nār, or he misheard nār 
for qarn. The written proximity between būq and nār and the acoustic 
similarity between qarn and nār can explain the confusion, but they do 
not seem enough to build a strong case.
2. Some people suggested a visual call rather than an acoustic one. Medina 
was known for its numerous tower-houses, āṭām, sg. uṭum, which were 
apparently pulled down by ʿUthmān ibn ʿAffān (r. 23–35/644–55), after 
the introduction of the adhān.16 Al-nār was often used as a signal.17 We 
also have manār towers, which later became the famous minarets. A 
fire could have been lit in such towers to help worshippers locate the 
mosques. Thus, it was possible to think of the fire as a signal for the call 
to prayer. However, fire was convenient mainly at night; more impor-
tantly, how could a fire wake up people for the morning prayer? If the 
suggestion was indeed made, it must have been deemed impractical 
and rejected.
3. Finally, Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī argues that C2’s narratives were incom-
plete. He gives therefore a fuller version of the story:
كلذ ]...[ الله لوسر لاقف ،اًقوب انذختا ول :اولاقف .ىراصنلل كلذ . . . الله لوسر لاقف اًسوقان انذختا ول اولاقف 
سوجملل كلذ لاقف اًران انعفر ول اولاقف ،دوهيلل
They said, ‘If we use the nāqūs (?).’ Then the Prophet said, ‘This 
[belongs] to the Christians.’ [Then] they said, ‘And if we use the būq.’ 
Then the Prophet said, ‘This [belongs] to the Jews.’ [Then] they said, 
‘And if we set a fire.’ Then he said, ‘This [belongs] to the Zoroastrians 
(majūs).’18
In Ibn Ḥajar’s interpretation, C2’s narratives are truncated. Nevertheless, 
contrary to the nāqūs and the būq, the fire had never been a convoker for 
anyone, Zoroastrians or others. Consequently, it could have been added to 
localise the narratives and address a population that had more contacts with 
or included Zoroastrians. This version, which Ibn Ḥajar favours, adds the 
prophetic authority to condemn unequivocally the use of non-Islamic rituals 
or traditions.

 36 ] 
Maroussia Bednarkiewicz
What Ibn Ḥajar does not take into consideration is the possibility that the 
version he supports is itself a late variant as well. We notice that his interpre-
tation is a back-projection that does not seem to match the initial meaning 
of the narratives discussed so far. It also reflects a clear hostility towards 
non-Islamic rituals, which seems to be a personal or later interpretation. In 
C1, the Prophet intervenes only to support ʿUmar, not to condemn the nāqūs 
or the būq. In C2, he does not appear at all. The first two categories give us 
an example of how hadith reports were used over time to address political 
and religious issues, how they were merged or truncated to fit the purpose, 
and how later scholars could still combine different versions and add the 
prophetic authority to serve their arguments. The third category continues 
to exemplify these points, although it contains much more elaborate and 
potentially later information.
Before turning to the third category, let us summarise our findings regard-
ing C1 and C2. The two categories display a certain number of similarities. 
Their comparison allows us to start drawing the proto-narrative, which pre-
ceded the narratives of both categories and was then embellished: in the case 
of C1 to give a preponderant role to ʿUmar; in the case of C2 to clarify and fix 
two religious rituals, the adhān and the iqāmah. Tables 2.2 and 2.3 summarise 
the similarities and dissimilarities between C1 and C2 at (1) the structural 
level and (2) the lexical level, respectively. The similar structure of the nar-
ratives within the two categories reveals the proto-narrative that inspired 
them. Conversely, the lexical disparities in Table 2.3 stress the distance that 
separates the two categories in terms of geographical origin and purpose.
Category 3
The third category contains twenty versions of the dream story with more 
differences across their texts than in any narratives of the previous two cate-
gories.19 This level of complexity is best illustrated by the chains of transmis-
sion. In Figure 2.4, tags have been added to the links between transmitters 
Table 2.2 Structural comparison between C1 and C2
Similarities
Differences C1 vs C2
External factors lead Muslims to create 
the adhān
When the Muslims arrived at Medina vs 
when the number of people increased
Suggestion to use non-Islamic means to 
call to prayer, including the nāqūs
The use of the būq/qarn vs the use of nār
Bilāl’s primary role as muʾadhdhin
ʿUmar, the Prophet and Bilāl vs Bilāl as 
only actor
Mention of the adhān
Mention of the adhān vs mention of the 
adhān and the iqāmah
General structure of the narrative
Semi-developed narrative vs summary-
like or incomplete version

  
The History of the Adhān 
[ 37
Table 2.3 Lexical comparison between C1 and C2
C2
C1
ُساَّنلا َرُثَك اَّمَل َلاَقَةَنيِدَمْلا اوُمِدَق َنيِح َنوُمِلْسُمْلا َناَك
 اهب/اَهَل ىَداَنُي َسْيَل ،َةَلاَّصلا َنوُنَّيَحَتَيَف َنوُعِمَتْجَي
ىَراَصَّنلاَو َدوُهَيْلا اوُرَكَذَفٍءْىَشِب ةولصلا َتْقَو اوُمَلْعَي ْنَأ اوُرَكَذ َلاَق 
ُهَنوُفِرْعَي
َكِلَذ يِف اًمْوَي اوُمَّلَكَتَف
اًراَن اوُروُي ْنَأ اوُرَكَذَف
 اًسوُقاَن اوُبِرْضَي ْوَأىَراَصَّنلا ِسوُقاَن َلْثِم اًسوُقاَن اوُذِخَّتا ْمُهُضْعَب َلاَقَف
ِدوُهَيْلا ِنْرَق َلْثِم انرق/اًقوُب ْلَب ْمُهُضْعَب َلاَقَو
 ِةَلاَّصلاِب يِداَنُي ًلاُجَر َنوُثَعْبَت َلاَوَأ ُرَمُع َلاَقَف
ملسو هيلع الله ىلص َِّالله ُلوُسَر َلاَقَف
  َةَماَقِلإا َرِتوُيَو َناَذَلأا َعَفْشَي ْنَأ ٌلَلاِب َرِمُأَف ِةَلاَّصلاِب ِداَنَف ْمُق ُلَلاِب اَي  
Figure 2.4 Chains of transmitters for C3

 Table 2.4 General outline of C3’s narratives
Ih1
Ih2 AR1 AR2
D1
D2
D3
D4
D5
T
Q1
Q2
MM IH1 IH2 IASh IS1
IS2
IS3
Dar
introduction
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
būq
x
x
[x]
x
x
x
x
x
nāqūs
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
[x]
x
x
x
x
x
x
karihah
x
x
x
x
x
ʿAbd Allāh ibn Zayd
x
x
x
x
[x]
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
the dream
x
[x]
x
[x]
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
– a man
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
– green garments
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
– nāqūs
x
[x]
x
[x]
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
– can I buy?
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
– something better
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
– adhān
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
[x]
x
– iqāma
x
x
x
x
x
[x]
x
Prophet’s approval
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
ʿUmar’s dream
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Bilāl
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Abbreviations: Ih = Ibn Hishām; AR = ʿAbd al-Razzāq; D = Abū Dāwūd; T = Tirmidhī; Q = Ibn Mājah; MM = Mālik; IH = Ibn Ḥanbal; IASh = Ibn Abī 
Shaybah; IS = Ibn Saʿd; Dar = Dārimī.

  
The History of the Adhān 
[ 39
to indicate which scholar transmitted to which recipients, thus solving the 
ambiguity otherwise present at common links. The diagram shows the quite 
even repartition of transmitters in different cities and throughout each epoch 
of twenty-five years. Only Medina holds a majority of transmitters over the 
first 150 years. The figure also highlights the spread of this version, which 
can be explained by the fact that it addresses directly the question of the right 
number of repetitions of the adhān, which became important when jurists 
started writing about the right practice of the adhān.
Outline of the Dream Story
The general outline of the narratives within C3 is identical to the one 
observed in C1 and C2, confirming the presence of the hypothetical proto-
narrative at their basis. The main difference is the mention of a dream which 
distinguishes this category. Table 2.4 presents the detailed outline, which 
can be divided into three sections: (1) the introduction; (2) the dream; and (3) 
the conclusion. Each narrative is presented horizontally and the cells with 
an ‘X’ indicate the presence of the element in the corresponding narrative. 
The square brackets indicate a partial or truncated mention of the element in 
question. Finally, each text has been given an acronym with the initial letters 
of the collector’s name and a number if he transmitted more than one narra-
tive. The references are given in the table.
The Introduction
Three elements distinguish the introduction to the dream story from 
the introductions of C1 and C2’s narratives: (a) the disagreement on the 
nāqūs; (b) the Prophet’s disapproval; and (c) the uneven treatment of the 
trumpet.
The Disagreement on the nāqūs
Transmitters of C3’s narratives disagreed regarding the suggestion of using 
a nāqūs. The words they employed indicate an absence of consensus about 
two main points:
1. Did the Prophet think of making a nāqūs or order it?
2. Was the nāqūs fabricated and eventually used or not?
Some stress the thinking process around the nāqūs or the wish to have a 
nāqūs which did not lead to any concrete actions. These narratives [AR1, 
AR2, D1, Ih2, IS1, IS2, IS3, Q2] contain the verbs hamma (‘he thought’), 
arāda (‘he wanted’), iʾtamara (‘he deliberated’), qāla (‘he said’) or dhakara (‘he 
mentioned’). Other narratives [D2, Dar, Ih1, IH1, IH2, IS1, Q1] state that the 
Prophet ordered a nāqūs with the verb amara (‘he ordered’ or ‘commanded’). 

 40 ] 
Maroussia Bednarkiewicz
The last group of narratives [D3, Dar, Ih1, Q1] explains that the nāqūs was 
fabricated and chiselled ready to be used or indeed struck with the verbs 
naḥata (in the passive form: nuḥita, ‘it was chiselled’) or naqasa (‘he struck the 
nāqūs’).
This disparity between the narratives concerning only the nāqūs sug-
gests that people disagreed about what really happened with the Christian 
instrument. It is possible that they did not remember properly and hence 
only partial memories were recalled and put together. Nevertheless, if the 
nāqūs was truly used at the time of the Prophet as a trial call to prayer, it is 
likely that some transmitters would try to hide this fact or would simply 
not believe it when it was narrated to them because imitating the Christians 
was already considered non-Islamic and the nāqūs became forbidden by 
prominent scholars.20 After having conquered vast territories previously 
under Christian rule, Muslims had to develop a legal apparatus to regulate 
the life of Christians within Muslim territories. By doing so, they were forced 
to introduce rules that did not exist at the time of the Prophet and could 
even contradict his example. If some narratives were attesting the accepted 
presence of the nāqūs at the time of the Prophet, they were in contradiction 
with the evolving policies of the Muslim authorities. To reconcile past and 
present, certain narrators seem to have added clarifying elements to guar-
antee an interpretation of their narratives conformed to the rulings of their 
time. Another example of such ‘clarifying elements’ is the disapproval of the 
Prophet that appears in five narratives.
Karihah: The Prophet’s Disapproval
The verb kariha is added to indicate that the Prophet disapproved of the use 
of the trumpet and/or the nāqūs [D1, Dar, Ih1, IH1, Q2]. Since it appears 
that the nāqūs was strongly associated with the introduction of the adhān in 
the collective memory, transmitters found ways to prevent their audience 
from interpreting the adhān narrative as a sign of the Prophet’s endorse-
ment of the Christian ritual. In fact, without the karihah clause, one senses an 
open attitude from the Prophet and his Companions towards non-Muslims’ 
instruments. They give the impression of seriously considering using them. 
They might have manufactured and even used them. With the conquest of 
Christian territories throughout the seventh century and the increasing need 
for distinctions between Muslims and Christians, this permeability between 
the two faiths diminished. Some imitation of Christian practices even became 
forbidden. In this context, it was probably easier to adapt the narratives 
to the new social environment with the karihah clause, than to imply that 
Muḥammad let Muslims use a Christian instrument without condemning it. 
Some transmitters found other solutions as well: they replaced the nāqūs by a 
‘thing’ [D5], or ‘two pieces of wood’ [MM], or they omitted it [D4, T].
This does not mean that these transmitters thought they were correct-
ing the narrative. They might as well have considered that it needed to be 

  
The History of the Adhān 
[ 41
clarified, mainly that the instruments were not adopted, and clarifications 
were needed to avoid confusion. What appears now as an addition could 
have been perceived by some as a clarification, a paraphrase. We observe 
here again the preference given to meaning over literal transmission.
The Trumpet
The Jewish trumpet is mentioned in seven narratives only. Most of the time, 
the word būq is used, which as we saw in C1 indicates a late redaction prob-
ably towards the third/ninth century. In one narrative [D1], we find ‘qunʿ 
in the sense of shabbūr’ (al-qunʿ yaʿnī al-shabbūr). The same narrative also 
explains that a banner was suggested along with the other instruments. 
These lexical peculiarities come with an Iraqi isnād, which differs consider-
ably from all other chains of transmission and does not share any common 
links with them. The elaborated text of the narrative implies again a late 
redaction and potential additions that did not belong to the proto-narrative. 
Yet it would be difficult to distinguish between the original elements and 
the later additions, which renders the reconstruction of the proto-narrative 
problematic. Nevertheless, the comparison of all the narratives in the 
present corpus has proven efficient in highlighting interests that may have 
influenced the making of the narratives. The karihah clause and the lexical 
discrepancies around the suggested instruments to call to prayer reflect such 
interests. Another – main – interest is also expressed in the dreams, the com-
parative analysis of which unveils the purpose of C3’s narratives.
The Dream
The impression of disparity between the narratives that comes out of the 
analysis of the introduction only becomes more obvious with the investiga-
tion of the dream. The transmitters seem to disagree with each other in their 
narratives, and the divergences are greater than in the introduction, to the 
extent that few versions display enough similarities to be associated with 
each other. The present section briefly summarises this central part, giving 
the main elements of the comparative analysis. The study focuses first on the 
structure and then on the content.
Despite their differences, the various dreams have an identical structure. 
By comparing the narratives, a strong correlation between the chains of 
transmission and the content occurs. When the contents are almost identi-
cal, the chains of transmission are also similar, like in IH1–Dar and IH2–D2. 
Conversely, when the contents present only vague similarities, the chains 
of transmission also vary considerably, like in Ih1, Q1 and IS1. This latter 
type of narratives – slightly similar context with slightly similar chains of 
 transmission – exemplifies the stress laid upon the meaning to the detri-
ment of the form and the wording, which easily leads to variations in the 
content, even with similar chains of transmission, as we saw in C1. Finally, 

 42 ] 
Maroussia Bednarkiewicz
two methods of transmission emerge: the summarising method, applied by 
al-Dārimī to concentrate the narrative on a central topic, even though this 
requires the removal of some elements; and the merging method, applied by 
Ibn Saʿd (IS1) to condense similar narratives into one single text, although 
this again required the removal of some elements.
While the structural comparison stressed the similarities between all the 
narratives, the analysis of isolated elements has highlighted rather the dis-
parities between the versions and their regional or personal particularities. 
We see again in the presentation of the dream how priority is given to the 
meaning over the form and the wording generates differences. The main 
example is probably the addition or omission of a green garment worn by the 
stranger who taught the call to prayer. Its presence shows the will to shape 
the dream according to common dream patterns, but since it is not important 
to the core message of the narrative it is omitted by several transmitters.21
The treatment of the formulae of the adhān is also diverse. Some narrators 
[AR1, D2, D4, Dar, IH1, IH2, Q1] give the formulae in full, for it seems that 
their main concern is to promote the righteous practice of the adhān accord-
ing to their belief. Table 2.5 summarises the number of repetitions of each 
formula presented by some of the narratives.
The existence of these different practices attests to the slow development 
of the adhān. The practice was probably neither uniform at the time of the 
Prophet nor was it established as an official ritual. It developed from a prac-
tical call to a ritual with a fixed set of chanted formulae. But the repetitions 
of these formulae varied from place to place and the Shiʿah distinguished 
themselves by using a longer version.
The Dreamers
The main dreamer is ʿAbd Allāh ibn Zayd (d. 32/652–3), a Companion, who 
is mainly remembered through his dream on the adhān.22 He belonged to 
the Anṣār and came from the Banū al-Ḥārith from Najrān. The adhān was 
undoubtedly not introduced as such in one night, for this contradicts all the 
evidence we have from the hadith reports themselves. This does not mean 
that ʿAbd Allāh did not play a role in the introduction of the adhān. As Savant 
notes, ‘Muslims could not write history however they pleased. The past was 
not infinitely flexible, but it could be reworked within certain boundaries.’23 
Shiʿi narratives also confirm in a way that ʿAbd Allāh did play a role: accord-
ing to them, he was unworthy to receive such a revelation, which came to the 
Prophet instead through an angel.24 These narratives challenge contempora-
neous memories regarding ʿAbd Allāh, suggesting thus that these memories 
existed. ʿAbd Allāh was undoubtedly remembered by many Muslims as the 
one who suggested the use of the voice to call to prayer.
How ʿAbd Allāh took part in the introduction of the adhān is impossible to 
say. Nevertheless, it is clear that the dream is a tool to give authority to the 
positions that it advocates. It follows a visible pattern of Islamic dream, with 

 Table 2.5 The formulae of the adhān and the iqāmah and their repetitions in the narratives of C3
ناذأ
Ih1
Ih2 AR1 AR2
D1
D2
D3
D4
D5
T
Q1
Q2
MM IH1
IH2 IASh IS1
IS2
IS3
Dar
رَبْكَأ ُللهٱ4242444(2)14
للهٱ َّلاِإ َهٰلِإ َلا ْنَأ ُدَهْشَأ2222222(2)12
 َّنَأ ُدَهْشَأمحمداللهٱ ُلوُسَر 2222222(2)12
ةَلاَّصلٱ ىَلَع َّيَح2222222(2)12
حَلاَفْلٱ ىَلَع َّيَح2222222(2)12
رَبْكَأ ُللهٱ2222222(2)22
للهٱ َّلاِإ َهٰلِإ َلا1111111(2)11
ةماقإ
Ih1
Ih2 AR1 AR2
D1
D2
D3
D4
D5
T
Q1
Q2
MM IH1
IH2 IASh IS1
IS2
IS3
Dar
رَبْكَأ ُللهٱ2(2)22(2)(1)
للهٱ َّلاِإ َهٰلِإ َلا ْنَأ ُدَهْشَأ1(2)11(2)(1)
 َّنَأ ُدَهْشَأمحمداللهٱ ُلوُسَر 1(2)11(2)(1)
ةَلاَّصلٱ ىَلَع َّيَح1(2)11(2)(1)
حَلاَفْلٱ ىَلَع َّيَح1(2)11(2)(1)
ةلاصلا تماق دق21222(2)2
رَبْكَأ ُللهٱ2(2)22(2)2
للهٱ َّلاِإ َهٰلِإ َلا1(1)11(2)1

 44 ] 
Maroussia Bednarkiewicz
a stranger, dressed in green, teaching formulae to a pious person. The major-
ity of narratives also affirm that ʿUmar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb had a similar dream, 
bringing forth again the second caliph [Ih1-2, AR1-2, D1-3, Q1, IH1-2, Dar]. 
In this case, the dream legitimates not only the adhān practices but also the 
role of ʿUmar.
Regional and temporal interests also emerge. In Mecca and, in the genera-
tion after Ibn Jurayj, in Baghdad too, ʿUmar’s role was the main concern. In 
most other cities, notably Basra, Wasit and Kufa, the focus seems to have 
been on the ritual’s shape, a conclusion confirmed by the analysis of C2. 
Medina, which was probably the birth place of the proto-narrative, is rep-
resented by the main harmonising narrators who tried to reconcile all the 
versions, namely, al-Zuhrī and Ibn Isḥāq.
The End of the Third Category of Narratives
Various elements are again introduced in the conclusions of the narratives. 
Often, the dream is said to have received the approval of the Prophet, which 
might be a direct response to Shiʿi criticism. Answers to the audience of the 
narratives appear as well. The anṣār may have wondered why ʿAbd Allāh 
ibn Zayd was not given the honour of calling the adhān since he is the one 
who had the dream. To this, some replied that ʿAbd Allāh did not have a 
strong enough voice, and others explained that he was sick. The Prophet is 
also said to have asked sometimes the reason why ʿUmar did not narrate his 
dream before ʿAbd Allāh. ʿUmar usually justified himself by arguing that 
ʿAbd Allāh was quicker than he was and he felt ashamed. These examples 
show how hadith reports were shaped by the audience, and the religious and 
political contexts as much as the transmitters.
Conclusion
The comparative analysis of the contents and the chains of transmission 
of this corpus of narratives has provided three kinds of information. With 
knowledge of the general context, it highlights first the interests at stake at 
certain times and places within religious, political and theological debates. 
Once the possible additions, omissions and modifications have been identi-
fied, it is then possible to point out the elements that triggered them or served 
as a basis for them. Finally, by observing these changes, it becomes easier 
for us to draw parallels between similar methods used by narrators to reach 
particular aims.
At the level of transmission, for instance, we have observed the priority 
given to the meaning over literality. Some transmitters seem to have been 
little concerned about a verbatim transmission, as long as their interpretation 
of the general meaning was preserved. This prioritising is applied by trans-
mitters who produce a summary-like version. Ibn Abī Shaybah and Mālik 
in particular display a unique recension of the dream story that resembles a 

  
The History of the Adhān 
[ 45
summary compared with the others. In both cases, the summary effect can be 
the sign of an old recension, the details of which would have been lost over 
the numerous generations of transmitters. It may also be a summary by one 
transmitter or collector who decided to give the general meaning without 
entering into the details of the story. This may be the strategy of a jurist, who 
wants to use the story as a basis for a ruling, contrary to a story-teller who 
might be more interested in entertaining his audience than lecturing them on 
the legal implication of the narrative. Indeed, Mālik and Ibn Abī Shaybah are 
both jurists, and they are more concerned about law-making than history.
A great variety of changes were applied on the adhān narratives, and yet 
the same structure common to the texts we have still appears behind all these 
changes and was brought to light by the comparative analysis carried out on 
this corpus. This structure, which I call the proto-narrative, reflects collective 
memories and was used by different narrators, transmitters, legal scholars or 
historians to serve their various interests. Modern technologies, in particular, 
the digitalisation of large numbers of sources, will allow us increasingly to 
analyse comprehensive corpora of similar narratives in order to extract more 
information on hadith genesis and Islamic history. The more pixels we have, 
the clearer the whole picture will appear.
Notes
 * 
I would like to thank Christopher Melchert, David Taylor, Belal Abu-Alabbas, 
Azaher Miah, Álvaro Tejero Cantero, and Geri Della Rocca de Candal for their 
valuable comments.
 1. Similar narratives belonging to this first category are also found in al-Nasāʾī, 
Kitāb al-sunan al-kubrá, ed. ʿAbd al-Ghaffār Sulaymān al-Bundārī et al., 7 vols 
(Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 1991), al-adhān 1, badʾ al-nidāʾ bi-al-ṣalāh, Nos 
1590–1; Ibn Khuzaymah, Ṣaḥīḥ, ed. Muḥammad Muṣṭafá al-Aʿẓamī, 4 vols 
(Beirut: al-Maktab al-Islāmī, 1970), al-ṣalāh, jimāʿ abwāb al-adhān wa-al-iqāmah, bāb 
badʾ al-adhān wa-al-iqāmah, p. 219; al-Bayhaqī, al-Sunan al-kubrá, ed. Muḥammad 
ʿAbd al-Qādir ʿAṭā, 7 vols (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 1994), 1:573–4, 
al-ṣalāh, dhikr jimāʿ abwāb al-adhān wa-al-iqāmah, bāb badʾ al-adhān, No. 1831.
 2. ʿAbd Al-Razzāq, al-Muṣannaf, ed. Ḥabīb al-Raḥmān al-Aʿẓamī, 10 vols (Beirut: 
al-Majlis al-ʿIlmī, 1970), 1:356–7; al-Bukhārī, al-Jāmiʿ al-ṣaḥīḥ, in Ibn Ḥajar, Fatḥ 
al-bārī, ed. Muḥibb al-Dīn al-Khaṭīb et al., 13 vols (Cairo: Maṭbaʿat Muṣṭafá 
Muḥammad, 1979), 2:77, al-adhān 1, bāb badʾ al-adhān wa-al-iqāmah, No. 604; 
Muslim, al-Ṣaḥīḥ, ed. Muḥammad Fuʾād ʿAbd al-Bāqī, 5 vols (Cairo: Dār Iḥyāʾ al-
Kutub al-ʿArabīyah, 1955), 1:385, al-ṣalāh 1, bāb badʿ al-adhān, No. 377; al-Tirmidhī, 
al-Jāmiʿ al-kabīr, ed. Bashshār ʿAwwād Maʿrūf, 6 vols (Beirut: Dār al-Gharb 
al-Islāmī, 1996), 1:233, al-ṣalāh 25, bāb mā jāʾ fi badʾ al-adhān, No. 190; Aḥmad 
ibn Ḥanbal, Musnad, ed. Shuʿayb al-Arnāʾūṭ et al., 50 vols (Beirut: Muʾassasat 
al-Risālah, 1993), 10:425. The translation into English is mine.
 3. Behnam Sadeghi, ‘The Travelling Tradition Test: a Method for Dating Traditions’, 
Der Islam 85 (2010): 210; Najam Iftikhar Haider, ‘The Geography of the Isnād: 

 46 ] 
Maroussia Bednarkiewicz
Possibilities for the Reconstruction of Local Ritual Practice in the 2nd/8th 
Century’, Der Islam 90 (2013): 318.
 4. On the Islamic trumpet and the Jewish qeren, see Avinoam Shalem, The Oliphant: 
Islamic Objects in Historical Context, Islamic History and Civilization, Studies and 
Texts, 54 (Leiden: Brill, 2004), 54; John Arthur Smith, Music in Ancient Judaism and 
Early Christianity (London: Routledge, 2016), 112, 158, 158 n. 47; and especially 
the study of the root ‘QRN’ by Margit Süring, The Horn-motifs in the Hebrew Bible 
and Related Ancient Near Eastern Literature and Iconography (Berrien Springs, MI: 
Andrews University Press, 1980), 38–116.
 5. On the evolution of the word būq, see EI2, s.v. ‘Būḳ’, by H. G. Farmer.
 6. Qurʾān, 5:58, 62:9. See Carl Heinrich Becker, ‘Zur Geschichte des islamischen 
Kultus’, Der Islam 3 (1912): 387.
 7. This might reflect a very early stage of Donner’s ‘Qurʾānicization’: see Fred M. 
Donner, ‘Qurʾānicization of Religio-Political Discourse in the Umayyad Period’, 
Revue des mondes musulmans et de la Méditerranée 129 (2011): 79–92.
 8. By ‘sacred sounds’ I mean sounds that are part of religious rituals. The concept 
is used rather loosely in socio-anthropological studies and I have not found yet 
a thorough examination of the development of sound from secular or profane to 
sacred. It goes without saying that sounds are often more difficult to study than 
material culture from the perspective of historical development.
 9. For the role of the Umayyads in promoting ʿUmar’s sunnah, see Avraham Hakim, 
‘ʿUmar b. al-Ḫaṭṭāb: l’autorité religieuse et morale’, Arabica 55 (2008): 21–3.
10. See how ʿUthmān added a third call to prayer when the number of people 
increased in ʿUmar ibn Shabbah, Kitāb tārīkh al-madīnah al-munawwarah: akhbār 
al-madīnah al-nabawīyah, ed. ʿAlī Muḥammad Dandal et al. (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub 
al-ʿIlmīyah, 1996), 958; al-Bukhārī, Ṣaḥīḥ, 2:393, al-jumuʿah 21, bāb al-adhān yawm 
al-jumuʿah, No. 912; Abū Dāwūd, Sunān, al-ṣalāh 217, bāb al-nidāʾ yawm al-jumuʿah, 
No. 1087; al-Tirmidhī, Jāmiʿ 1: 521–2, al-jumuʿah 255, bāb mā jāʾ fi adhān al-jumuʿah, 
No. 516; Ibn Mājah, Sunān, iqāmat al-ṣalāh wa-al-sunnah fīhā 97, bāb mā jāʾa fī 
al-adhān yawm al-jumuʿah, No. 1135.
11. Jan Vansina, Oral Tradition as History (Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin 
Press, 1985), 160. Also see the discussion of ‘memories of memories’ in 
Gregor Schoeler, The Biography of Muḥammad: Nature and Authenticity (London: 
Routledge, 2011).
12. A similar narrative is also present in al-Bayhaqī, al-Sunan al-kubrá 1:574, al-ṣalāh, 
dhikr jimāʿ abwāb al-adhān wa-al-iqāmah, bāb badʾ al-adhān, No. 1832. Al-Bayhaqī 
quotes the version transmitted by Isḥāq ibn Ibrāhīm and mentions the version of 
al-Bukhārī without noting its differences.
13. Al-Bukhārī, al-Jāmiʿ al-ṣaḥīḥ 2:77, 82, al-adhān 1, bāb badʾ al-adhān, No. 603, and 
al-adhān 2, bāb al-adhān mathná mathná, No. 606; Muslim, Ṣaḥīḥ, al-ṣalāh 2, bāb 
al-amr bi-shafʿ al-adhān, No. 378. The English translation is mine.
14. According to Juynboll, such narratives as do not involve the Prophet (mawqūf) 
‘have a greater claim to being considered historically tenable’: G. H. A. Juynboll, 
Encyclopedia of Canonical Ḥadīth (Leiden: Brill, 2007), 59.
15. Juynboll, Encyclopedia, 58.

  
The History of the Adhān 
[ 47
16. Jonathan Bloom, The Minaret (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2013), 46. 
Bloom also describes the construction of lighthouse towers between Kufa and 
Mecca: ‘the early Abbasids also erected beacons and markers. As early as 752, 
the first Abbasid caliph Abu-al-ʿAbbās had erected beacon towers (manār) and 
milestones (mīl) along the pilgrimage route from Kūfa to Mecca’ (Bloom, Minaret, 
56).
17. Some examples of ‘fire signals’ may be seen in Bloom, Minaret, 24.
18. Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī, Fatḥ al-Bārī, ed. Muḥammad Fuʾād ʿAbd al-Bāqī, 13 vols 
(Beirut: Dār al-Maʿrifah, 1959), 2:80, al-adhān 10, bāb badʾ al-adhān, No. 604. The 
English translation is mine.
19. ʿAbd al-Razzāq, Muṣannaf, 1:356; al-Tirmidhī, al-Jāmiʿ al-kabīr 1:231–2, al-ṣalāh 
25, bāb mā jāʾ fi badʾ al-adhān, No. 189; Ibn Mājah, Sunan, ed. Muḥammad Fuʾād 
ʿAbd al-Bāqī, 5 vols (Cairo: ʿĪsá al-Bābī al-Ḥalabī, 1952), 1:232–3, al-adhān wa-al-
sunnah fīhā 1, bāb badʾ al-adhān, Nos 706–7; Abū Dāwūd, Sunan, al-ṣalāh 27, bāb badʾ 
al-adhān, Nos 498, 499, 506, 507, 512; Mālik ibn Anas, al-Muwaṭṭaʾ, rec. Yaḥyá ibn 
Yaḥyá, al-ṣalāh 41, mā jāʾa fī al-nidāʾ lil-ṣalāh, No. 1; Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal, Musnad 
26:399–403; Muḥammad ibn Saʿd, Kitāb al-ṭabaqāt al-kabīr, ed. ʿAlī Muḥammad 
ʿUmar, 11 vols (Cairo: Maktabat al-Khānjī, 2001), 1:212–13; Ibn Abī Shaybah, 
al-Muṣannaf, ed. Ḥamad ibn ʿAbd Allāh al-Jumʿah and Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm 
al-Luḥaydān, 16 vols (Riyadh: Maktabat al-Rushd, 2004), 2:5; Ibn Hishām, 
al-Sīrah al-nabawīyah, ed. ʿUmar ʿAbd al-Salām Tadmurī, 4 vols (Beirut: Dār 
al-Kitāb al-ʿArabī, 1990), 2:149–51; ʿAbd Allah ibn ʿAbd al-Raḥmān al-Dārimī, al-
Musnad, ed. Ḥusayn Salīm Asad al-Dārānī, 4 vols (Riyadh: Dār al-Mughnī, 2000), 
2:758–60. These hadith reports are also found in Ibn Ḥibbān, al-Ṣaḥīḥ, arr. Ibn 
Balabān, ed. Shuʿayb al-Arnāʾūṭ and Ḥusayn Asad, 18 vols (Beirut: Muʾassasat 
al-Risālah, 1984–91), 4:541–3; and in the Sunan of al-Bayhaqī, 1:574–5.
20. For more on the question, see Salam Rassi, ‘Justifying Islam in the Islamic Middle 
Ages: the Apologetic Theology of Abdisho bar Brikha (d. 1318)’, DPhil disserta-
tion, University of Oxford, 2016, 213–15. I also dedicate the final chapter of my 
doctoral thesis to the opinions of three Muslim jurists regarding the nāqūs.
21. See Pierre Lory, Le rêve et ses interprétations en Islam (Paris: Albin Michel, 2015); 
Elizabeth Sirriyeh, Dreams and Visions in the World of Islam: a History of Muslim 
Dreaming and Foreknowing (London: I. B. Tauris, 2015); John Lamoreaux, The 
Early Muslim Tradition of Dream Interpretation (Albany, NY: State University of 
New York Press, 2002); and, in particular, Leah Kinberg, ‘Qurʾān and Ḥadīth: 
a Struggle for Supremacy as Reflected in Dream Narratives’, in Louise Marlow 
(ed.), Dreaming Across Boundaries: the Interpretation of Dreams in Islamic Lands 
(Boston, MA: Ilex Foundation and Harvard University Press, 2008), 41; Leah 
Kinberg, ‘Literal Dreams and Prophetic Hadith in Classical Islam: a Comparison 
of Two Ways of Legitimation’, Der Islam 70 (1993): 282. Kinberg treats the 
legitimisation function of dreams in an earlier article, ‘The Legitimization of 
the Madhāhib through Dreams’, Arabica 32 (1985): 47–79, in which she shows ‘the 
similarity between the dream and the hadith as literary means of expression. 
They both reflect ideas and tendencies prevalent in Islam, and both are used as 
means of legitimization’ (78).

 48 ] 
Maroussia Bednarkiewicz
22. See al-Mizzī, Tahdhīb al-kamāl fi asmāʾ al-rijāl, ed. Bashshār ʿAwwād Maʿrūf, 35 
vols (Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Risālah, 1982–92), 14:540; Ibn Saʿd, Ṭabaqāt 3:497; 
al-Ṭabarī, Tārīkh al-rusul wa-al-mulūk, ed. Muḥammad Abū al-Faḍl Ibrāhīm, 
Dhakhāʾir al-ʿarab 30, 10 vols (Cairo: Dār al-Maʿārif, 1960–9), 3:121.
23. Sarah Bowen Savant, The New Muslims of Post-Conquest Iran: Tradition, Memory 
and Conversion (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013), 168.
24. See al-Qāḍī Abū Ḥanīfah al-Nuʿmān, Kitāb al-Īḍāḥ, ed. Muḥammad Kāẓim 
Raḥmatī (Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Aʿlamī, 2007), 59–60; and Muḥammad ibn ʿAlī 
Ibn Bābawayh al-Qummī, Kitāb man lā yaḥḍuruhu al-faqīh, ed. Husayn al-ʿAlamī, 
4 vols (Beirut: Dār Ṣaʿb, 1981–6), 1:197–8. I would like to thank Kumail Rajani for 
these references.

 [ 49 ]
CHAPTER
3
Ibn Al-MubA
¯rak, Traditionist 
Christopher Melchert
Ibn al-Mubārak (d. 181/797) is most famous for two collections of hadith, 
al-Jihād and al-Zuhd. Two others attributed to him are the additional collec-
tions al-Musnad and Kitāb al-Birr wa-al-ṣilah.1 He has been the subject of five 
monographs that I know of: four in Arabic, one in English. Ibn al-Mubārak 
also figured prominently in a 1975 article by Raif Georges Khoury, a 1996 
book by Michael Bonner, a 2007 book by D. G. Tor, a 2009 article by Roberta 
Denaro, and a 2015 article by this author. The following chapter is mainly a 
review essay comparing Salem’s book and the four earlier ones in Arabic, 
then some new research by me.
Arabic Monographs to Date
The earliest of the Arabic monographs is that of Muḥammad ʿUthmān Jamāl, 
published in 1971.2 To his credit, Jamāl covers the main aspects of his impor-
tance in chapters on ‘Ibn al-Mubārak the traditionist’, ‘Ibn al-Mubārak the 
jurisprudent’ and ‘his Sufism’. On the other hand, he relies heavily on earlier 
synthetic scholarship, not discriminating between early and late sources. 
For example, he lists his shaykhs in hadith as named by Ibn Ḥajar, and then 
adds eleven named only by al-Nawawī.3 He does not assemble names from 
the works of Ibn al-Mubārak (admittedly in manuscript as yet except for 
al-Zuhd). And he hardly indicates that any of what he relates is controversial, 
such as Ibn al-Mubārak’s relation to Abū Ḥanīfah, which he characterises 
as the loyalty of a disciple to his master, citing works of the thirteenth– 
twentieth centuries.4
The next biography to have appeared is that of ʿAbd al-Majīd al-Muḥtasib, 
published in 1972.5 Like Jamāl, al-Muḥtasib quotes medieval biographical 
sources to establish the events of his life, his teaching and his reputation. 
He spends no time on the works of Ibn al-Mubārak himself. That of ʿIṣām 
Muḥammad al-Ḥājj ʿAlī, published in 1990, is an even shorter synthesis of the 

 50 ] 
Christopher Melchert
biographical literature.6 Hence, for example, whereas Jamāl and al-Muḥtasib 
observe that al-Khaṭīb al-Baghdādī offers two dates for Ibn al-Mubārak’s 
birth, 118 and 119, ʿAlī offers only one, 118.7
The fourth in the series is by far the most substantial, from Muḥammad 
Saʿīd ibn Muḥammad Ḥasan Aḥmad Bukhārī, published in 2003.8 He relies 
heavily on the biographical literature, like his predecessors, but he comes up 
with more information. For example, his list of the works of Ibn al-Mubārak 
runs to twelve, although including mistaken citations, such as three manu-
scripts that are all just copies of the Musnad.9 He also analyses the works 
themselves in various ways. For example, he tells us that Kitāb al-Zuhd in 
the recension of al-Ḥusayn ibn al-Ḥasan includes 411 items not from Ibn 
al-Mubārak, almost exactly a quarter of the book.10 He supplements his list 
of Ibn al-Mubārak’s most important shaykhs by telling us how often each 
of them is cited in each of the Six Books and the Zuhd, Musnad and Jihād of 
Ibn al-Mubārak.11 (He does not include figures for transmissions in Kitāb 
al-Birr wa-al-ṣilah. It is extant in the recension of al-Ḥusayn ibn al-Ḥasan, who 
according to Bukhārī contributed 184 items out of 338, 60 per cent, from other 
shaykhs than Ibn al-Mubārak.12)
The last of the monographs in Arabic is from Riyāḍ Aḥmad Ibrāhīm 
al-Dūrī, published in 2005.13 Like the works of Jamāl, al-Muḥtasib and ʿAlī, it 
is mainly a collection of material from biographical dictionaries. The special 
attention to jihād and history that al-Dūrī’s title promises turns out to mean a 
long chapter, almost half the book, quoting hadith reports about the Prophet 
and Rightly Guided Caliphs with Ibn al-Mubārak in the isnād.
So much for monographs in Arabic. To generalise, they are all character-
ised by uncritical quotation of the biographical record. They are most obvi-
ously uncritical in ignoring the possibility that Ibn al-Mubārak’s reputation 
should have changed over time, or from field to field (as between Sufi- and 
hadith-oriented biographers), so that a quotation from al-Qushayrī in the 
eleventh century or al-Dhahabī in the fourteenth has the same status as 
a quotation from Ibn Abī Ḥātim al-Rāzī in the early tenth century. More 
subtly, they tend to shy away from controversy, even where it is evident in 
the medieval sources. A notable example is Ibn al-Mubārak’s relation to Abū 
Ḥanīfah. Al-Muḥtasib quotes liberally from ʿĪsá al-Ayyūbī’s refutation of 
al-Khaṭīb al-Baghdādī but concludes simply that after taking up with Mālik, 
Ibn al-Mubārak inclined towards him and away from Abū Ḥanīfah. Mālik’s 
juridical programme was closer to his respecting the Sunnah.14 ʿAlī does 
no more than to list Mālik among Ibn al-Mubārak’s most important teach-
ers and to quote him as acknowledging a debt to Abū Ḥanīfah.15 Bukhārī 
relates Ibn al-Mubārak’s praise of Abū Ḥanīfah but nothing of his alleged 
repudiation. He says summarily that his greatest influences in jurisprudence 
were Sufyān al-Thawrī, representing the ‘school’ (madrasah) of hadith, and 
Abū Ḥanīfah, representing the ‘school’ of raʾy.16 Al-Dūrī complacently cites 
Tārīkh Baghdād to establish that Abū Ḥanīfah was his master in jurispru-
dence.17 Al-Muḥtasib thus comes the closest to acknowledging controversy, 

  
Ibn Al-Mubārak, Traditionist  
[ 51
but concludes on the basis of an anachronistic, dogmatic characterisation of 
early Mālikism.
Bukhārī’s book is by far the best researched of these, and indeed furnishes 
substantial evidence of Ibn al-Mubārak’s legal position, mainly eighty-six 
opinions attributed to him by al-Tirmidhī (d. 279/892?) in al-Jāmiʿ al-ṣaḥīḥ. 
In this selection, at least, Ibn al-Mubārak agrees fifty-two times with Sufyān 
al-Thawrī, forty-six times with Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal, forty-five times with 
al-Shāfiʿī, forty times with Isḥāq ibn Rāhūyah, only sixteen times with Mālik 
and ten times with ‘the people of Kufa’. On the other hand, he disagrees 
seventeen times with Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal, fourteen times with al-Shāfiʿī, thir-
teen times with Isḥāq ibn Rāhūyah and ten times with Mālik. (Al-Tirmidhī 
reports many more agreements than disagreements.) This apparently aligns 
him in law with Sufyān al-Thawrī (more on this to come). But I am the one 
who had to count: Bukhārī just quotes his sources. This piling up of quota-
tions without analysis seems to be another recurring feature of Arabophone 
scholarship. Books in Arabic are often useful this way. ‘It’s like having a 
research assistant’, a doctoral student recently observed to me. A basic dif-
ficulty, I would guess, is that these Arab authors apparently write partly to 
set up their subject as a model for emulation. Jamāl’s title even makes this 
explicit. Discussing past disputes among Muslims is not helpful to such a 
project, at least within the Sunni camp.
Studies in European Languages
A major study in French is by Raif Georges Khoury, examining quotations 
of Ibn al-Mubārak’s works in the Iṣābah of Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī (d. Cairo, 
852/1449).18 Of forty citations of the Zuhd that Khoury has found in the 
Iṣābah, most quotations are close, if not identical, to passages in our text of 
the Zuhd. However, Khoury was unable to find seven or eight in our text of 
the Zuhd.19 Similarly, he found thirteen citations of Ibn al-Mubārak, al-Jihād, 
in the Iṣābah but was unable to locate one of them in our text.20 He attributes 
discrepancies to Ibn Ḥajar’s having access to different copies of the text. 
Khoury takes it that both Ibn al-Mubārak and al-Ḥusayn ibn al-Ḥasan wrote 
books by the title al-Birr wa-al-ṣilah.21 Khoury is notably optimistic about 
finding stable texts already in the eighth century.22 It is conceivable that 
Ibn al-Mubārak assembled a collection of hadith reports on filial piety, later 
interpolated by al-Ḥusayn ibn al-Ḥasan; however, it seems more likely to 
me that al-Ḥusayn’s material from Ibn al-Mubārak should be considered a 
part of what he took down from Ibn al-Mubārak’s dictation, to which he felt 
free to add material from other notes just because the concept of fixed texts 
became established only around the end of his lifetime. Of course, I benefit 
here from a generation of scholarship not available to Khoury in the 1970s, 
especially the work of Gregor Schoeler.23
Here I shall review Michael Bonner, Deborah Tor and Roberta Denaro very 
cursorily. The first two are concerned with the politics of frontier warfare, 

 52 ] 
Christopher Melchert
which they conceive of as part of the wider shift of power from the caliph 
to independent ulema.24 Denaro describes how the later biographical tradi-
tion developed some elements of his biography, among others how travel, 
trade and jihād kept him apart from ʿAbbāsid power, while leaving alone 
others, notably the likelihood that he was celibate.25 My own contribution to 
the study of Ibn al-Mubārak is an article written in 2011 but not published 
till 2015.26 It mainly tries to fix the relation between Ibn al-Mubārak’s works 
al-Zuhd and al-Jihād, more generally renunciation and the holy war, even 
renunciation and Islamic law at the end, where I contend that the terms 
qitāl and even largely siyar were eclipsed by jihād under the influence of 
renunciant piety. Notable shortcomings are neglect of earlier studies in 
Arabic, particularly Bukhārī’s, neglect of Tor’s study, neglect of an edition of 
al-Birr wa-al-ṣilah, and mis-statement of the number of hadith related by Ibn 
al-Mubārak in Bukhārī’s Ṣaḥīḥ.
To generalise about these four studies, they obviously stress jihād. However, 
two of them are studies of jihād that incidentally discuss Ibn al-Mubārak, one 
is about jihād and other issues as presented in the biographical tradition, and 
the last tries to place Ibn al-Mubārak’s doctrine of jihād in the context of his 
work in the fields of hadith and renunciation. By contrast with the Arabic 
monographs, they are all centrally concerned with change over time. For 
example, Bonner observes that feats of arms occupy increasingly much space 
in biographies of Ibn al-Mubārak.27 I suppose this concern with change over 
time illustrates several outstanding tendencies of modern Western historical 
writing: scepticism of orthodoxies (here, the idea that current Sunni views 
express an unchanging, correct Islam), a critical attitude (here meaning to 
be on the lookout for history as propaganda for current views – to the dog-
matically committed likely to seem cynical), and the imperative that scholars 
always say something new (the conventional view they must challenge being 
almost always to begin with what the tradition says about itself, so that here 
is where scholars will continually probe for weaknesses).
Most recently, in 2016, there appeared a monograph by Feryal Salem, a 
version of her 2013 PhD dissertation.28 Salem prefaces her survey of the bio-
graphical sources with a mealy-mouthed critique of all attempts to confirm 
or disconfirm the veracity of medieval accounts. She concludes, ‘it must be 
noted that even unverifiable historical narratives remain significant for the 
way in which the general corpus of these reports in the classical texts depict 
an ontological truth about how early Muslims themselves viewed Islamic 
scholars and their work’ (8). This seems typically wordy (what, by contrast, 
would be a non-ontological truth?). Worse, Salem often refers as here to ‘clas-
sical texts’, implicitly denying change over time among Muslims recon-
structing their past. On the contrary, there had to be changes, as Bonner has 
observed of Ibn al-Mubārak’s feats of arms.
Salem makes limited and sometimes careless use of previous scholar-
ship. She correctly cites Gregor Schoeler for the idea that books before the 
mid-ninth century typically have the nature of lecture notes, but ignores its 

  
Ibn Al-Mubārak, Traditionist  
[ 53
relevance to the works attributed to Ibn al-Mubārak. If he is the source of 
only three-quarters of the items in al-Zuhd in the recension of al-Ḥusayn ibn 
al-Ḥasan, which she prefers, fewer than half of the items in al-Birr wa-al-ṣilah, 
then how much should we infer from their content and organisation about 
Ibn al-Mubārak’s peculiar values? Salem cites Bukhārī as telling us that Ibn 
al-Mubārak transmitted from 539 scholars in the Six Books, but this figure is 
actually what Bukhārī got by combining numerous lists and, crucially, his 
own count of shaykhs in the Zuhd, Musnad and Jihād of Ibn al-Mubārak.29 She 
endorses Nimrod Hurvitz’ concept of ‘mild asceticism’, overlooking that his 
contrasting notion of extreme asceticism is based on one source only, ʿAṭṭār 
from three centuries later; likewise, Leah Kinberg’s neutralising reduction 
of zuhd to ‘ethics’, overlooking that it is almost entirely based on definitions 
from the Sufi period.30
Salem does not seem deeply familiar with the literature of Sufism. She 
says of Ibn al-Mubārak, al-Zuhd, that ‘This book is strikingly similar in 
format to the Risāla al-Qushayriyya’ (45). The first section of the Risālah is a 
collection of biographies, the middle one explains Sufi terminology, and the 
last reviews Sufi practice. In format, it is extremely unlike al-Zuhd, a topical 
collection of sayings from start to finish. Strange interpretations likewise 
betray lack of familiarity with hadith and its literature. Salem says of Ibn 
Lahīʿah that, ‘Ibn Abī Ḥātim and Abū Zurʿa al-Rāzī are cited as having said, 
“His case is problematic. He wrote ḥadīths for [the purpose of] recogni-
tion’, citing Ibn Abī Ḥātim, Taqdimah 5:147 (59). The book is actually al-Jarḥ 
wa-al-taʿdīl (Taqdimah is the title of the introductory volume alone), the first 
quoted authority there is Abū Ḥātim, not his son, and the Arabic phrase 
is yuktabu ḥadīthuhu ʿalá al-iʿtibār, a common expression in tenth-century 
hadith criticism meaning that his hadith is worth recording for the purpose 
of corroboration.31 She proposes that Ibn al-Mubārak, al-Jihād, is the earliest 
book in the jihād genre, other examples being Ibn Abī ʿĀṣim and Ibn Ṭāhir 
al-Sulamī’s books by the same title (n.43). But Ibn Abī ʿĀṣim’s book com-
prises almost entirely Prophet hadith that encourage one to fight, whereas 
Ibn al-Mubārak’s book is mostly post-prophetic, while Ibn Ṭāhir’s is mostly 
an exposition of Shāfiʿi law. They plainly represent no particular genre. 
(How many pages of either did Salem read?) The poet Abū al-ʿAtāhiyah 
becomes ‘Ibn Itāhiyya’ (89).32
Salem carelessly uses anachronistic terminology. She says of al-Jihād, ‘a 
great many of the ḥadīths included in them [i.e., it] do not directly deal with 
combat or associated legal matters, but rather they discuss the so-called 
“greater jihād” of piety and ethical conduct’ (75). The term al-jihād al- akbar 
does not occur in Shiʿi sources until the early tenth century, and in Sunni not 
until the mid-eleventh.33 She says that ‘Isrāʾīliyyāt . . . were regarded as unre-
liable’ (120), says a quotation of Jesus is ‘one of the Isrāʾīliyyāt, perhaps trans-
mitted through Christian converts to Islam’ (n.122), asks ‘What accounts for 
Ibn al-Mubārak’s limited use of Isrāʾīliyyāt and Ibn Ḥanbal’s willingness to 
include them?’ (135), and so on, without hinting that the term was invented 

 54 ] 
Christopher Melchert
only much later, also without any census of stories from pre-Muḥammadan 
prophets reported by Ibn al-Mubārak – I count thirteen in al-Zuhd from 
Wahb ibn Munabbih alone, their most notorious purveyor.34
‘ʿAbdallāh b. al-Mubārak was known for his success as a merchant’, Salem 
says, ‘and his disapproval of ascetics who utilised the concept of tawakkul 
as a pretext for not striving to earn a livelihood’ (37). Whether there were 
such insincere ascetics seems difficult for historians to determine – certainly, 
Salem attempts no demonstration. She returns often to Ibn al-Mubārak’s 
being a trader to discredit any notion that he advocated a distasteful level 
of austerity but not to al-Zuhd, which says almost nothing to connect tawak-
kul and the legitimacy of living on alms (but more on this to come). It has 
plenty on the danger of riches; for example, ‘He who has two dirhams will be 
judged more severely than he who has one’ (Abū Dharr, No. 555).
I could go on. For a monograph, The Emergence of Early Sufi Piety is distress-
ingly under-researched. It lowers my esteem for a section of the University of 
Chicago and for the book series in which it has been published, both of which 
should have called for repairs. Some of its faults evidently come of falling 
between two stools, in particular being aware of sceptical Western scholar-
ship yet wanting to set up Ibn al-Mubārak as a model for emulation. It is 
plain that Salem is distressed by the impracticality of eighth-century renunci-
ant piety, for example, hence her determination to find that Ibn al-Mubārak 
advocated something very different. From the point of view of historical 
scholarship, though, it appears to be a disaster, leading her to ignore what 
she sees and to avoid looking further. In some measure, perhaps, this is the 
hazard of determining one’s results in advance as opposed to going wher-
ever one’s evidence leads, the latter course being at least the announced 
preference among scholars in the West today.
The Distribution of Ibn al-Mubārak’s Shaykhs
To accomplish something more positive here, I propose to build on Bukhārī’s 
book and my previous article to understand better Ibn al-Mubārak’s work 
as a traditionist. Among other things, that article offers some comparisons 
among collections of hadith from Ibn al-Mubārak. They seem to be inconsist-
ent with one another as to the geographical provenance of the hadith therein. 
I have now collected 227 hadith reports in al-Bukhārī’s Ṣaḥīḥ transmitted 
through Ibn al-Mubārak. Considering different regions, most are from Syria, 
overwhelmingly Yūnus ibn Yazīd al-Aylī (d. 159/775–6?), from whom Ibn 
al-Mubārak is recorded as transmitting seventy-eight reports (34 per cent of 
the total). From Yemen, all from Maʿmar ibn Rāshid (d. 154/770–1), come 
forty-four (19 per cent). From Basra come thirty-six (16 per cent), Kufa four-
teen (6 per cent) and Iraq altogether 22 per cent. From Medina come thirty-
nine (17 per cent), Mecca ten (4 per cent), the Hijaz altogether another 22 per 
cent. Egypt trails as the source of just five (2 per cent).
I have undertaken a parallel analysis of the 343 hadith reports in Aḥmad’s 

  
Ibn Al-Mubārak, Traditionist  
[ 55
Musnad transmitted through Ibn al-Mubārak. From Syria, half of them from 
Yūnus ibn Yazīd, come 110 (32 per cent). From the Yemen, all from Maʿmar 
ibn Rāshid, come thirty-one (9 per cent). From Basra come twenty-seven (8 
per cent), Kufa twenty-four (7 per cent) and Iraq altogether 17 per cent. From 
Medina come forty-four (13 per cent), Mecca seven (2 per cent), the Hijaz 
altogether 16 per cent. By comparison, Basra is the source of a quarter of 
the items in al-Zuhd, Kufa almost a third, Iraq altogether a majority. About 
a sixth comes from the Hijaz, an eighth from Syria, less than half that from 
Yemen. When it comes to provenance, the big difference between Aḥmad’s 
selection and al-Bukhārī’s is that eighty-two in Aḥmad’s Musnad come from 
Egypt, or 24 per cent of the total.
As for the topics of hadith reports transmitted by Ibn al-Mubārak, I have 
taken a rough list of categories from Muslim’s introduction to his Jāmiʿ.35 
The rank order is the same in al-Bukhārī, al -Ṣaḥīḥ and Aḥmad, al-Musnad: 
in diminishing order, aḥkām (rules), al-targhīb wa-al-targhīb (encouragements 
and discouragements), history, and rewards and punishments. Less common 
are hadith reports setting out devotions (such as prayers to repeat), sunan 
al-dīn (theology), eschatology and other things. However, a considerably 
larger proportion of the hadith in al-Ṣaḥīḥ deal with aḥkām than in al-Musnad, 
44 per cent as opposed to 33 per cent, while a somewhat smaller proportion 
in al-Ṣaḥīḥ deal with al-targhīb wa-al-tarhīb (17 per cent as opposed to 26 per 
cent). Aḥmad’s selection of hadith transmitted by Ibn al-Mubārak comprises 
less on aḥkām than al-Musnad as a whole, more on al-targhīb wa-al-tarhīb, 
which at least agrees on Ibn al-Mubārak’s being identified as an author 
mainly with Kitāb al -Zuhd.36
Still, it appears that collectors such as Aḥmad and al-Bukhārī, separated 
from each other by about one generation, chose which of Ibn al-Mubārak’s 
hadith to transmit according to their peculiar needs (including short chains 
between themselves and Ibn al-Mubārak’s shaykhs) and the accident of what 
shaykhs they had met. Sufyān al-Thawrī is the jurisprudent with whom Ibn 
al-Mubārak most often agrees in the sample from al-Tirmidhī, besides being 
by far the most cited in al-Zuhd (189 times, as against ninety-four citations 
of Maʿmar, the next most), yet Ibn al-Mubārak transmits from him only six 
times in each of the Ṣaḥīḥ and the Musnad (and from Mālik just once in the 
Ṣaḥīḥ, twice in the Musnad) – an example of how Aḥmad and al-Bukhārī 
bypass Ibn al-Mubārak at need.
I adduced geographical comparisons before in support of my conten-
tion that we should not consider the Zuhd, Musnad and Jihād as equally 
assembled by Ibn al-Mubārak and reflecting his preferences and emphases. 
Methodologically, I would now extend that to any eighth-century figure that 
appears in a ninth-century collection. First, we should assume that any ninth-
century collection of Prophet hadith presents only a small sample of what 
was circulating a century earlier. Secondly, we should avoid any strong pre-
sumption that it is a representative sample. This much may count as common 
knowledge. Thirdly, I would now stress, we should also be reluctant to infer 

 56 ] 
Christopher Melchert
the general shape of a particular traditionist’s knowledge from selective quo-
tation a century later of the hadith he transmitted.
Ibn al-Mubārak’s Juridical Tendency
As indicated before, the biographical sources themselves disagree as to Ibn 
al-Mubārak’s relation to Abū Ḥanīfah. Juridical literature of the tenth century 
and later seems to indicate that he was moderately important to the Ḥanafi 
tradition. He is cited eleven times in al-Sarakhsī (483/1090–1?), al-Mabsūṭ. 
He is cited eighteen times in al-Jaṣṣāṣ al-Rāzī (d. 370/981), Mukhtaṣar ikhtilāf 
al-ʿulamāʾ: seven times transmitting Abū Ḥanīfah’s opinion, ten times Sufyān 
al-Thawrī’s, and once his own. He is cited eighteen times in Ibn Māzah 
(d. 616/1219–20), al-Muḥīṭ al-burhānī fī al-fiqh al-nuʿmānī: eight times trans-
mitting Abū Ḥanīfah’s opinion, once Sufyān al-Thawrī’s, and nine times his 
own.37 This weakens the credibility of ninth-century and later reports that he 
repudiated Abū Ḥanīfah late in life.
As for the earlier hadith tradition, al-Tirmidhī, al-Jāmiʿ al-ṣaḥīḥ, is appar-
ently our most voluminous source for Ibn al-Mubārak’s juridical opinions 
and, as reviewed above, seems to indicate that Ibn al-Mubārak was closest to 
a non-Ḥanafi tendency within the Kufan tradition. (Following Schacht, the 
presumption here is that there were identifiable regional traditions of Islamic 
law in the eighth century, within each region there being identifiable major-
ity and minority positions.38) Al-Tirmidhī recounts at the beginning of Kitāb 
al-ʿIlal, the final book of al-Jāmiʿ al-ṣaḥīḥ, his sources for the juridical opinions 
he reports. Here are those from whom he has Ibn al-Mubārak’s:
Abū Wahb Muḥammad ibn Muzāḥim (Marwazi, d. 209/824–5) < Ibn 
al-Mubārak;
ʿAbdān (ʿAbd Allāh ibn ʿUthmān, Marwazi, d. 221/836) < Sufyān ibn ʿAbd 
al-Malik (Marwazi, d. before 200/815–16) < Ibn al-Mubārak;
Ḥibbān ibn Mūsá (Marwazi, d. 233/847–8) < Ibn al-Mubārak;
Wahb ibn Zamʿah (Marwazi) < Faḍālah al-Nasawī (transferred to Marw) 
< Ibn al-Mubārak.
One oddity of the list is that ʿAbdān and Ḥibbān ibn Mūsá are major sources 
of Ibn al-Mubārak’s hadith for al-Bukhārī (between them some 40 per cent 
of the total), whereas none of the others appears as a transmitter from Ibn 
al-Mubārak in either the Ṣaḥīḥ of al-Bukhārī or the Musnad of Aḥmad. 
Another is that al-Tirmidhī has ʿAbdān relating legal positions from Ibn 
al-Mubārak indirectly, whereas al-Bukhārī quotes him as relating hadith 
from him directly. Ibn al-Nadīm also attributes to Ibn al-Mubārak a book by 
the name of al-Sunan, most likely a collection of hadith on juridical topics. It 
is possible that ʿAbdān heard hadith from him directly, this book al-Sunan 
from him only indirectly; however, it seems equally possible that a link 
has been suppressed in ʿAbdān’s relation of hadith. At any rate, the list of 

  
Ibn Al-Mubārak, Traditionist  
[ 57
al-Tirmidhī’s sources confirms that Ibn al-Mubārak’s doctrine was collected 
especially in Marw.
Muḥammad ibn Naṣr al-Marwazī (d. 295/907–8?), Ikhtilāf al-ʿulamāʾ, is 
another major early source for the juridical opinions of early figures outside 
the classical schools of law.39 Unfortunately, Ibn al-Mubārak is not quoted 
here very often – fourteen times, by my count, as opposed to eighty-six times 
in al-Tirmidhī, al-Jāmiʿ. In this sample, Ibn al-Mubārak apparently agrees 
most often with Aḥmad, Isḥāq and al-Shāfiʿī, disagrees most often with 
aṣḥāb al-raʾy (probably the early Ḥanafīyah) and al-Shāfiʿī’s Baghdadi fol-
lower Abū Thawr (d. 240/854). However, the numbers are too small to look 
significant; for example, three disagreements with aṣḥāb al-raʾy are balanced 
by two agreements. A number of Arab scholars have collected the juridical 
opinions of various early figures from quotations in later works.40 I suspect 
that not enough quotations of Ibn al-Mubārak survive to constitute a book (to 
reconstitute Kitāb al-Sunan).
Ibn al-Mubārak’s closeness to Sufyān al-Thawrī, on the evidence of both 
Ḥanafi writers and al-Tirmidhī, is confirmed by an early Ḥanbali source 
that quotes him as saying, ‘We do not choose anyone over Sufyān.’41 Ibn 
Abī Ḥātim quotes Muʿtamir ibn Sulaymān (Basran, d. 187/802–3) as saying 
that Sufyān al-Thawrī was succeeded as faqīh al-ʿarab (‘the jurisprudent of 
the Arabs’) by Ibn al-Mubārak.42 He also quotes Ibn al-Mubārak through 
Abū Dāwūd al-Ṭayālisī (Basran, d. 204/819?) as saying that when he was 
in Khurasan, he would sit with Shuʿbah (Basran, d. 160/777?) and Sufyān, 
meaning, explains Abū Dāwūd, that he would inspect their books.43 Muʿtamir 
and Abū Dāwūd might be interpreted here as Basrans keen to appropriate 
a Kufan authority for their own centre. Present knowledge identifies Sufyān 
himself with a Kufan minority opposed to the predominant Kufan school 
that would survive in the Ḥanafi.44 Even the Ḥanbali sources are ambiguous 
as to the connection between Ibn al-Mubārak and Abū Ḥanīfah. For example, 
he is quoted both as rejecting Abū Ḥanīfah’s position as to raising the hands 
in the course of the ritual prayer and as saying, ‘I used to go to him (meaning 
Abū Ḥanīfah) in secret from Sufyān and our comrades.’45 Altogether, he 
seems to have followed the Kufan school of law (unsurprising for someone 
from Marw) without choosing decisively between the two leading tenden-
cies identified (especially in the next century?) with Abū Ḥanīfah and Sufyān 
al-Thawrī.46
Ibn al-Mubārak on Voluntary Poverty
Salem relies heavily on biographies of Ibn al-Mubārak to make out that he 
was a staunch advocate of inward detachment from worldly goods without 
any outward abstention. The argument seems weak inasmuch as it does not 
draw on the early literature of renunciation, particularly Ibn al-Mubārak’s 
own major contribution to it, al-Zuhd. However, this is admittedly not only 
Salem’s idea, for Ibn al-Mubārak has been made out to be a major early 

 58 ] 
Christopher Melchert
opponent of tawakkul by none other than Benedikt Reinert, relying on al-Zuhd 
in manuscript and quotations in later Sufi literature.47 This seems to be the 
sense of a quotation of Ibn al-Mubārak in Abū Naṣr al-Sarrāj (d. 378/988), 
Kitāb al-Lumaʿ: ‘Your acquisitions (makāsib) will not prevent you from turning 
over your affairs (tafwīḍ) and total trust (tawakkul; in God) as long as you 
do not lose them in your acquisition.’48 That is, deliberate pursuit of gain 
may put one’s proper dependence on God at risk, as by involving ethically 
dubious means, but not necessarily. Reinert also cites an earlier quotation in 
a Ḥanbali source, the book of al-Khallāl (d. Baghdad, 311/923) in favour of 
earning a living: ‘I never saw any of them who was rational (ʿāqil)’, glossed as 
meaning the Sufis (ṣūfīyīn).49 Al-Muḥāsibī names two Sufis who repudiated 
buying and selling, ʿAbd Allāh ibn Yazīd and ʿAbdak, perhaps in particular 
at the time of the Fourth Civil War (Amīn vs Maʾmūn, 195–8/810–13, much 
longer in Syria).50 Ṣūfīyat al-Muʿtazilah may have been particularly associated 
with inkār al-kasb, the repudiation of deliberate activity in pursuit of one’s 
provision (trying to live on whatever God should send one’s way, in effect 
probably alms), although al-Muḥāsibī attributes this doctrine especially to 
Shaqīq al-Balkhī (d. 194/809–10). Ibn al-Nadīm lists two Muʿtazili writers he 
particularly identifies as Sufis. However, it is only a fringe member of their 
party, Ibn al-Rāwandī, to whom he attributes a book Fasād al-dār wa-taḥrīm 
al-makāsib, meaning ‘the decadence of the House [of Islam] and the illicitness 
of gain’. This title sounds as if it is less likely to have enjoined living on alms 
as a pious exercise than to have lamented that all sources of income were by 
now so involved with illicit practices, especially the private appropriation 
of what should have been public lands, that it was impossible any longer to 
live purely.51
Whether it was particularly Sufis’ reliance on alms that bothered Ibn 
al-Mubārak is uncertain. The previous item in al-Khallāl’s book quotes 
ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Mahdī (Basran, d. 198/814) as saying more generally 
that some of the Sufis had been led to madness, others to secret unbelief 
(zandaqah), but then contrasting Sufyān al-Thawrī’s taking along a pudding 
on the pilgrimage that included lamb, which perhaps makes the Sufis overly 
abstemious.52 On the other hand, the next quotation has Mālik ibn Anas 
(d. 179/795) laughing uncontrollably on being told of some Yemeni Sufis 
who wore fine clothes but then did such-and-such – just what is not speci-
fied, but citing tawakkul as an excuse for refusing to earn a living is certainly 
not the issue.53
Reinert does not rely only on Sufi literature to characterise Ibn al-Mubārak’s 
position, but cites a section title in al-Zuhd as the earliest expression of 
polarisation. Unknown to him, though, the title is al-tawakkul wa-al-tawāḍuʿ 
(‘putting one’s trust [in God] and humility’) in the recension of al-Ḥusayn ibn 
al-Ḥasan but al-kafāf min al-ʿaysh (‘sufficiency of livelihood’) in the recension 
of Nuʿaym ibn Ḥammād.54 Moreover, the only one of the seven following 
reports to mention tawakkul is a version of something in the Sermon on the 
Mount: ‘If you properly put your trust in God (law innakum tatawakkalūna ʿalá 

  
Ibn Al-Mubārak, Traditionist  
[ 59
Allāh ḥaqqa tawakkulih), he will provide for you as he provides for the birds. 
They go out with empty stomachs and return with full’ (No. 559; cf. Matthew 
6:26).55 This is not a refutation of inkār al-kasb, tending rather to endorse it.
Al-Khallāl makes it clear that tawakkul was an issue for Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal 
(d. 241/855). He repeatedly quotes him against such practice of tawakkul as 
leads to dependence on alms; for example, denying that someone who goes 
on pilgrimage without any provision but in the company of others is actu-
ally mutawakkil, since he relies on their food sacks for his provision.56 Besides 
the Prophet and Aḥmad, the person al-Khallāl most often quotes is Sufyān 
al-Thawrī, followed by Sufyān ibn ʿUyaynah (d. 198/814) and (surprisingly, 
since he was supposedly Shaqīq al-Balkhī’s master) Ibrāhīm ibn Adham 
(d. 163/779–80?). But he quotes Ibn al-Mubārak only once, without mention 
of tawakkul.57 Neither, indeed, do Sufyān al-Thawrī, Sufyān ibn ʿUyaynah 
or Ibrāhīm ibn Adham speak of tawakkul. On the evidence of this source, 
the association of tawakkul with inkār al-kasb was a development of the ninth 
century.
I do not question whether there was increasing distrust of austerity in the 
second half of the eighth century (as distinct from fear that outward austerity 
should be combined with inward worldliness, which must go back further). 
Sufyān al-Thawrī and Sufyān ibn ʿUyaynah are both major sources of mate-
rial in Ibn al-Mubārak, al-Zuhd, and I have myself cited both of them in con-
nection with increasing distrust. To the contrary, still, are many praises of 
voluntary poverty quoted of Ibn al-Mubārak; for example, ‘Increase of your 
Hereafter will come only by the decrease of your (share of) the world, while 
increase of your (share of) the world will come only by the decrease of your 
Hereafter.’58 His own practice of austerity is mentioned, as when Ibn Abī 
Ḥātim quotes someone who saw Ibn al-Mubārak completely barefoot, shop-
ping in the market for his needs.59 Even in the Sufi literature, we find such 
quotations of him as this definition of zuhd: ‘Renunciation is to keep trust in 
God most high while loving poverty.’60 I have argued before that the most 
reliable picture of eighth-century renunciant piety is to be found in the litera-
ture of hadith, the least reliable in that of Sufism. In neither of them does Ibn 
al-Mubārak appear to be a favourite source of world-affirming sentiments. 
I would conclude he was at least no leader of the opposition to outward 
 austerity itself.
Ibn al-Mubārak’s Theological Tendency
The question of Sunnism against Shiʿism was raised at the Pembroke confer-
ence. Ibn al-Mubārak was particularly associated with a hardening of atti-
tudes in the later eighth century. This seems only weakly supported in the 
sources that I have surveyed. The creed attributed alternatively to Ghulām 
Khalīl (d. 275/888) and al-Barbahārī (d. 329/941) quotes Ibn al-Mubārak, 
‘The root of 72 fancies is just four of them. From these four branched out the 
72 fan cies: the Qadarīyah, the Murjiʾah, the Shī ʿah, and the Khawārij.’61 Abū 

 60 ] 
Christopher Melchert
Nuʿaym relates two stories in which Ibn al-Mubārak takes a stand against 
association with unspecified heretics (ṣāḥib bidʿah).62 Ibn Abī Ḥātim mentions 
that Ibn al-Mubārak said they had left (i.e., ceased to relate hadith from) 
ʿAmr ibn ʿUbayd (d. 144/761–2?) because he was an active promoter (kāna 
yadʿū), glossed as referring to qadar (anti-predestinarianism).63 ʿAbd Allāh 
ibn Aḥmad makes him both more involved with ʿAmr and more disapprov-
ing: he was asked, ‘Have you heard from ʿAmr ibn ʿUbayd?’ He said, ‘This 
much’ with his hand, indicating a great deal. ‘So why do you not name him, 
whereas you do name others of the Qadarīyah?’ He said, ‘Because this one 
was a chief (raʾs).’64
Ibn al-Mubārak is sometimes quoted against relating hadith from Shiʿah; 
for example, ‘Do not relate hadith of ʿAmr ibn Thābit, for he insults the early 
ones (salaf).’65 On the other hand, there is al-Mizzī’s list of 211 shaykhs from 
whom Ibn al-Mubārak related hadith: by my count, ten are identified by 
Ibn Ḥajar as Shiʿi, five as Qadari and four as Murjiʾ (with some overlap; for 
example, ʿAwf al-Aʿrābī, Shiʿi and Qadari).66 One who is oddly missing from 
al-Mizzī’s list, ʿAbd Allāh ibn Lahīʿah (Egyptian, d. 174/790), was sometimes 
accused of Shiʿism.67 Ibn Abī Ḥātim quotes Ibn al-Mubārak himself as saying 
he had given rise to doubts (arāba).68 Yet Ibn Lahīʿah is the third most-cited 
of Ibn al-Mubārak’s sources in Aḥmad’s Musnad, second in al-Zuhd. Ibn Abī 
Ḥātim also quotes Nuʿaym ibn Ḥammād as saying, ‘Ibn al-Mubārak would 
not discard a man’s hadith unless he heard something of him that he could 
not rebut.’69 At least by this measure, whom he trusted to relate hadith, Ibn 
al-Mubārak does not seem to have led the way in rejecting sectaries.
The Works of Ibn al-Mubārak
I observed in my previous article that Ibn al-Nadīm attributes to Ibn 
al-Mubārak five works: Kitāb al-Sunan on jurisprudence (fiqh), Kitāb al-Tafsīr, 
Kitāb al-Tārīkh, Kitāb al-Zuhd and Kitāb al-Birr wa-al-ṣilah.70 Of the first, pre-
sumably a collection of hadith on legal topics, no trace survives. Of the 
second, comprising Qurʾānic commentary, I observed earlier that later 
sources seldom quote either Ibn al-Mubārak’s own opinion on the Qurʾān 
or Qurʾānic glosses with him in the isnād. However, I also observed that 
Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal quotes ʿAbd al-Razzāq as recalling that Ibn al-Mubārak 
and Maʿmar (ibn Rāshid) would recite tafsīr to each other.71 In the Tafsīr 
itself, we have this report from ʿAbd al-Razzāq: ‘I saw Ibn al-Mubārak 
reading al-tafsīr before Maʿmar’, probably referring to his reading or reciting 
from his notes for Maʿmar’s approval as to their accuracy.72 A good two-
thirds of ʿAbd al-Razzāq’s own Qurʾān commentary is made up of glosses 
he relates from Maʿmar. It therefore seems likely, I will now add, that Ibn 
al-Mubārak’s Tafsīr was a similar collection of glosses from Maʿmar with 
additions from elsewhere. I have little to add here of Kitāb al-Tārīkh, the third 
title on Ibn al-Nadīm’s list. Bukhārī collects Ibn al-Mubārak’s comments on 
the reliability of hadith transmitters but admits that he is not among the most 

  
Ibn Al-Mubārak, Traditionist  
[ 61
prominent critics.73 One occasionally runs across a quotation; for example, 
from Ibn Ḥajar, ‘(Sulaymān ibn Ṭarkhān) al-Taymī, on whom the people of 
Basra relied who had not heard from Abū al-ʿĀliyah.’74
As for Kitāb al-Birr wa-al-ṣilah, Sezgin lists no manuscript for it and 
I reported in my previous article that I knew of no trace of it since Ibn 
al-Nadīm’s citation.75 I did observe that Ibn Khayr al-Ishbīlī (d. 575/1179) 
mentions having a Kitāb al-Birr wa-al-ṣilah from al-Ḥusayn ibn al-Ḥasan. I 
guessed that this was the title attributed by Ibn al-Nadīm directly to Ibn 
al-Mubārak, and that it comprised some combination, like al-Zuhd, of mate-
rial from Ibn al-Mubārak and from other shaykhs. I have since remarked 
citations of Kitāb al-Birr wa-al-ṣilah by Ibn Ḥajar and al-Suyūṭī (d. 911/1505), 
both of whom knew it in the recension of al-Ḥusayn ibn al-Ḥasan.76 What 
I found only on reading Salem’s book is that there was a 1991 edition of it. 
As observed above, items related through Ibn al-Mubārak constitute only 
40 per cent of the text. (Ibn Ḥajar also had a book from Ibn al-Mubārak not 
mentioned by any other source I know of, al-Istiʾdhān, presumably a col-
lection of hadith on the etiquette of asking for entry to someone’s house. It 
was apparently collected by Ibn al-Mubārak’s leading disciple ʿAbdān.77) It 
seems fair to consider al-Birr a work not by Ibn al-Mubārak but by al-Ḥusayn 
ibn al-Ḥasan.
Like al-Birr, the Musnad attributed to Ibn al-Mubārak survives as a unicum 
in Damascus.78 Fuat Sezgin identifies the work as the recension of al-Ḥasan 
ibn Sufyān al-Nasawī (d. 303/916), which is based on the isnāds in the 
work. Nearly all of it is traced through him < Ḥibbān ibn Mūsā al-Marwazī 
(d. 233/847–8) < Ibn al-Mubārak, but a few items are rather < Ibrāhīm ibn 
ʿAbd Allāh al-Khallāl < Ibn al-Mubārak.79 Ḥibbān ibn Mūsá was also a major 
source of Bukhārī’s for hadith from Ibn al -Mubārak. It was first edited by 
Muṣṭafá ʿUthmān Muḥammad as part of his doctoral dissertation (al-Azhar, 
1979), later published as a book.80 It was independently edited and pub-
lished by Ṣubḥī al-Badrī al-Sāmarrāʾī before Muḥammad’s book version had 
appeared.81 Both editions seem to be imperfect but Muḥammad’s the better. 
It includes six hadith reports missed by al-Sāmarrāʾī (Nos 76, 86–9, 141), 
whereas al-Sāmarrāʾī’s edition includes one report missed by Muḥammad’s 
(No. 147 between Muḥammad’s Nos 157 and 158). Al-Sāmarrāʾī’s edition 
sometimes alters texts to make them congruent with better-known versions 
(for example, al-Sāmarrāʾī, No. 242, lā mā ṣallaw, as opposed to Muḥammad, 
No. 257, ammā mā ṣallawu ʾl-ṣalāta fa-lā).
Kitāb al-Zuhd is one of five works attributed to Ibn al-Mubārak by Ibn 
al-Nadīm.82 Ibn Ḥajar apparently refers to it interchangeably as al-Zuhd 
and al-Raqāʾiq. The Alexandria manuscript of Abū Nuʿaym’s recension 
refers to it as al-Raqāʾiq fī al-zuhd, the Chester Beatty manuscript as al-Zuhd 
wa-al-raqāʾiq, the Leipzig manuscripts as al-Zuhd. Editor Ḥabīb al-Raḥmān 
al-Aʿẓamī combined two manuscripts of the recension of al-Ḥusayn ibn 
al-Ḥasan al-Marwazī (l. Mecca, d. 246/860–1) with one of the recension of 
Nuʿaym ibn Ḥammād (d. Samarra, 228/843?) to produce the first printed 

 62 ] 
Christopher Melchert
version under the title Kitāb al-Zuhd wa-al-raqāʾiq. He first presents the 
recension of al-Ḥusayn, then 436 items separately numbered found only in 
Nuʿaym’s recension. The editor says little of how the recensions of al-Ḥusayn 
and Nuʿaym are related except for the extra items in the latter. It appears, 
however, that the first three-quarters of Nuʿaym’s recension is a fairly close 
parallel to al-Ḥusayn’s, for al-Aʿẓamī occasionally remarks where an item 
of Nuʿaym’s comes between two items in al-Ḥusayn’s; for example, No. 203 
from Nuʿaym comes between Nos 793 and 794 from al-Ḥusayn, No. 206 from 
Nuʿaym between Nos 822 and 823 from al-Ḥusayn. He also, as observed, 
points out where a section title in al-Ḥusayn’s recension corresponds to a dif-
ferent one in Nuʿaym’s. Subsequent indexes refer to the items from Nuʿaym 
alone as ‘additions’ (ziyādāt) and the Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah edition of 
1419/1998 announces on the title page Kitāb al-Zuhd wa-yalīhi Kitāb al-Raqāʾiq, 
as if they were effectively separate books.83 They look to me closer than that. 
(Also, I would reserve the term ‘additions’ for items inserted by al-Ḥusayn 
from shaykhs other than Ibn al-Mubārak – as observed, about a quarter of 
the extant text.)
I have recently inspected a microfilm of the Chester Beatty manuscript 
of al-Zuhd (as one might have expected Salem’s dissertation supervisors 
to suggest her doing). It runs from No. 704 to the middle of No. 934, then 
(folios having been shuffled) from the middle of No. 616 to No. 700. That is, 
it intersects with a little less than a fifth of the Carullah (Istanbul) manuscript 
of al-Ḥusayn’s recension. It reproduces the same chain of transmitters as 
al-Aʿẓamī’s manuscript, which plainly rules out using this chain to provide 
anything more than a terminus post quem for when either text was copied: 
in both versions, the chain of transmitters was evidently copied along with 
the manuscript. As for textual variants between al-Aʿẓamī’s recensions, the 
Chester Beatty manuscript usually agrees with the Carullah manuscript 
on which al-Aʿẓamī relies against the Alexandria manuscript of Nuʿaym’s 
recension. Sometimes, however, Chester Beatty agrees with Alexandria; 
for example, in including an addition at the end of No. 721. It includes one 
additional item between Nos 786 and 787 not included in either the Carullah 
or Alexandria manuscripts, whereby Mujāhid (Meccan, d. 103/721–2?) gives 
the advice, ‘When you (start to) yawn while reciting the Qurʾān, restrain it 
till it goes away.’ It includes the same extra item as Nuʿaym between Nos 
822 and 823. It exposes an instance of homoioteleuton from No. 927 to No. 
928, where al-Aʿẓamī’s edition apparently jumps from the middle of one 
item into the middle of the next. (As with several smaller discrepancies, the 
mistake here may have come from al-Aʿẓamī rather than his manuscripts.84)
In my previous article, I argued against supposing that the core of 
al-Ḥusayn’s recension (that is, items he relates from Ibn al-Mubārak) was 
compiled directly by Ibn al-Mubārak himself, whereas Nuʿaym’s was his 
independent compilation. Al-Aʿẓamī’s notes suggest that Nuʿaym’s recen-
sion closely resembles al-Ḥusayn’s except for al-Ḥusayn’s interpolations 
from other than Ibn al-Mubārak and the last part of Nuʿaym’s, which 

  
Ibn Al-Mubārak, Traditionist  
[ 63
continues where al-Ḥusayn’s text leaves off. Comparison with the Chester 
Beatty manuscript confirms that some discrepancies between al-Ḥusayn’s 
recension and Nuʿaym’s go back only to much later copies. We obviously 
need a new edition of al-Zuhd based on all the known manuscripts. My guess 
at this point is that not only the Chester Beatty but also the Carullah manu-
script of al-Ḥusayn’s recension is incomplete. The sources of the additional 
section of Nuʿaym’s recension are very similar to those of al-Ḥusayn’s. In 
both, for example, the shaykh most often cited by Ibn al-Mubārak is by far 
Sufyān al-Thawrī, followed by Maʿmar, then Ibn Lahīʿah; in both, a little 
over half of all items come from Iraq. Altogether, the more similar these 
two recensions are, the more we should consider their contents and order to 
reflect Ibn al-Mubārak’s priorities, not just those of his disciples. The Zuhd of 
Ibn al-Mubārak would then be comparable to its contemporary the Muwaṭṭaʾ 
of Mālik: extant in a number of recensions that vary somewhat in the number 
of items, their order and the exact titles under which they are classified but 
that must correspond roughly to notes from Ibn al-Mubārak and Mālik 
themselves.
Notes
 1. Ibn al-Mubārak, al-Zuhd wa-al-raqāʾiq, ed. Ḥabīb al-Raḥmān al-Aʿẓamī (Malegaon: 
Majlis Iḥyāʾ al-Maʿārif, 1386, repr. with different pagination but the same item 
numbers, Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 1419/1998); Ibn al-Mubārak, K. 
al-Jihād, ed. Nazīh Ḥammād (Beirut: Dār al-Nūr, 1971/1391, repr. with differ-
ent pagination but the same item numbers, Beirut: al-Maktabah al-ʿAṣrīyah, 
1409/1988); Ibn al-Mubārak, al-Musnad, ed. Ṣubḥī al-Badrī al-Sāmar rāʾī (Riyadh: 
Maktabat al-Maʿārif, 1407/1987), also ed. Muṣṭafá ʿUthmān Muḥammad, with K. 
al-Birr wa-al-ṣilah (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 1411/1991). Ibn al-Mubārak, 
al-Zuhd wa-al-raqāʾiq, ed. Aḥmad Farīd, 2 vols (Riyadh: Dār al-Miʿrāj al-Dawlīyah, 
1415/1995), is a corrected version of al-Aʿẓamī’s that omits additions from 
al-Ḥusayn al-Marwazī and Ibn Ṣāʿid as well as all items found only in the recen-
sion of Nuʿaym ibn Ḥammād.
 2. Muḥammad ʿUthmān Jamāl, ʿAbd Allāh ibn al-Mubārak al-imām al-qudwah, Aʿlām 
al-muslimīn 1 (Damascus: Dār al-Qalam, 1391/1971).
 3. Jamāl, ʿAbd Allāh, 82–3.
 4. Jamāl, ʿAbd Allāh, 100–8, citing Ẓafar Aḥmad ʿUsmānī (Pakistani, d. 1394/1974), 
al-Nawawī (d. 676/1277) and Ibn Ḥajar al-Haytamī (d. 974/1567?).
 5. ʿAbd al-Majīd al-Muḥtasib, ʿAbd Allāh ibn al-Mubārak al-Marwazī (118–181 H.) 
(Amman: Wizārat al-Awqāf wa-al-Shuʾūn wa-al-Muqaddasāt al-Islāmīyah, 
1392/1972).
 6. ʿIṣām Muḥammad al-Ḥājj ʿAlī, al-Imām al-mujāhid ʿAbd Allāh ibn al-Mubārak, Aʿlām 
al-fuqahāʾ wa-al-muḥad dithīn (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 1411/1990).
 7. Muḥtasib, ʿAbd Allāh, 7; Jamāl, ʿAbd Allāh, 48; ʿAlī, Imām, 55.
 8. Muḥammad Saʿīd ibn Muḥammad Ḥasan Aḥmad Bukhārī, al-Imām ʿAbd Allāh ibn 
al-Mubārak al-Marwazī al-imām al-nāqid (Riyadh: Maktabat al-Rushd, 1424/2003).

 64 ] 
Christopher Melchert
 9. Bukhārī, al-Imām ʿAbd Allāh, 55–8.
10. Bukhārī, al-Imām ʿAbd Allāh, 60.
11. Bukhārī, al-Imām ʿAbd Allāh, 77–149.
12. Bukhārī, al-Imām ʿAbd Allāh, 71.
13. Riyāḍ Aḥmad Ibrāhīm al-Dūrī, al-Imām al-ḥāfiẓ ʿAbd Allāh ibn al-Mubārak: 
mawāqifuhu al-jihādīyah wa-marwīyātuhu al-tārīkhīyah (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub 
al-ʿIlmīyah, 1426/2005).
14. Muḥtasib, ʿAbd Allāh, 54–62. On ʿĪsá al-Ayyūbī al-Malik al-Muʿaẓẓam 
(d. 624/1227), his defence of Abū Ḥanīfah, and the first edition of Tārīkh Baghdād, 
see Ahmad Khan, ‘Islamic Tradition in an Age of Print’, in Elisabeth Kendall 
and Ahmad Khan (eds), Reclaiming Islamic Tradition (Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press, 2016), 52–99, at 62–3.
15. ʿAlī, al-Imām al-mujāhid, 58–9.
16. Bukhārī, al-Imām ʿAbd Allāh, 322–3, 330–1.
17. Dūrī, al-Imām al-ḥāfiẓ, 67.
18. Raif Georges Khoury, ‘L’Importance de l’Iṣāba d’Ibn Ḥağar al-ʿAsqalānī pour 
l’étude de la littérature arabe des siècles islamiques: vue à travers l’example des 
oeuvres de ʿAbdallāh ibn al-Mubārak (118/736–181/797)’, Studia Islamica 42 
(1975): 115–45.
19. Khoury, ‘Importance’, 123–7. The edition of al-Zuhd available to Khoury lacks 
an index. This want is now supplied by Yūsuf ʿAbd al-Raḥmān al-Marʿashlī, 
Fihris Kitāb al-Zuhd lil-imām al-ḥāfiẓ shaykh al-Islām ʿAbd Allāh al-Mubārak [sic] 
al-Marwazī, Silsilat fahāris kutub al-sunnah 5 (Beirut: Dār al-Nūr al-Islāmī, 
1408/1987), alternatively Muḥammad Muḥammad Sharīf, Mawsūʿat fahāris kutub 
al-zuhd (Dammam: Dār Ibn al-Jawzī, 1413/1992).
20. Khoury, ‘Importance’, 128–9.
21. Khoury, ‘Importance’, 130.
22. Cf. Raif Georges Khoury, ‘L’Avènement des Abbasides et son importance 
pour le développ[eme]nt de l’écrit ure en Islam’, in Krzystof Kos´cielniak (ed.), 
Prosperity and Stagnation: Some Cultural and Social Aspects of the Abbasid Period, 
Orientalia Christiana Cracoviensia monographiae 1 (Cracow: UNUM, 2010), 
63–85.
23. See esp. Gregor Schoeler, The Oral and the Written in Early Islam, ed. James E. 
Mont gom ery, trans. Uwe Vagelpohl, Routledge Studies in Middle Eastern 
Literatures, 13 (London: Routledge, 2006), and Gregor Schoeler, The Genesis of 
Literature in Islam: From the Aural to the Read, trans. Shawkat M. Toorawa, New 
Edinburgh Islamic Surveys (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2009). 
See also Stefan Leder, ‘Authorship and Transmission in Unauthored Liter-
ature: the Akhbār Attributed to Haytham ibn ʿAdī’, Oriens 31 (1988): 67–81, and 
Christopher Melchert, ‘Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal’s Book of Renuncia tion’, Der Islam 85 
(2008): 345–59, for parallel cases of additions from other sources.
24. Michael Bonner, Aristocratic Violence and the Holy War, American Ori ental ser. 
81 (New Haven, CT: American Oriental Society, 1996); D. G. Tor, Violent Order: 
Religious Warfare, Chivalry, and the ʿAyyār Phenomenon in the Medieval Islamic 
World, Istanbuler Texte und Studien, 11 (Würzburg: Ergon, 2007).

  
Ibn Al-Mubārak, Traditionist  
[ 65
25. Roberta Denaro, ‘From Marw to the tuġūr: Ibn al-Mubārak and the Shaping of a 
Biographical Tradition’, Eurasian Studies 7 (2009): 125–44.
26. Christopher Melchert, ‘Ibn al-Mubārak’s Kitāb al-Jihād and Early Renunciant 
Literature’, in Robert Gleave and István Kristó-Nagy (eds), Violence in Islamic 
Thought from the Qurʾān to the Mongols, Legitimate and Illegitimate Violence in 
Islamic Thought, 1 (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2015), 49–69.
27. Bonner, Aristocratic Violence, 120.
28. Feryal Salem, The Emergence of Early Sufi Piety and Sunnī Scholasticism: ʿAbdallāh b. 
al-Mubārak and the Formation of Sunnī Identity in the Second Islamic Century, Islamic 
History and Civilization, Studies and Texts, 125 (Leiden: Brill, 2016).
29. Salem, Emergence of Early Sufi Piety, 45, citing Bukhārī, al-Imām ʿAbd Allāh, 80.
30. Salem, Emergence of Early Sufi Piety, 105–7; Nimrod Hurvitz, ‘Biographies and 
Mild Asceticism: a Study of Islamic Moral Imagination’, Studia Islamica 85 (1997): 
41–65; Leah Kinberg, ‘What is Meant by zuhd’, Studia Islamica 61 (1985): 27–44.
31. On iʿtibār, see Shammāʾ Jamāl al-Asmar, al-Iʿtibār fī ʿulūm al-ḥadīth al-sharīf, 
Maktabat al-rasāʾil al-jāmi ʿī yah al-ʿālamīyah, 39 (Damascus: Dār al-Nawādir, 
1434/2013). It is glossed as ‘consideration’ by Jonathan A. C. Brown, Hadith: 
Muhammad’s Legacy in the Medieval and Modern World, Foundations of Islam 
(Oxford: Oneworld, 2009), 93.
32. It is to her credit that Salem reproduces and translates poetry attributed to Ibn 
al-Mubārak. Oddly, she cites no source for any of it. I here compare Salem’s 
version (Emergence of Early Sufi Piety, 89) with that in al-Qāḍī ʿIyāḍ, Tartīb 
al-Madārik, ed. Muḥammad ibn Tāwīt al-Ṭanjī and Saʿīd Aḥmad Aʿrāb, 8 vols 
(Rabāṭ, al-Muḥammadīyah, Tetouan: various, 1966–83), 3:47.
33. Melchert, ‘Ibn al-Mubārak’s Kitāb al-Jihād’, 67.
34. See Roberto Tottoli, ‘Origin and Use of the Term isrāʾīliyyāt in Muslim Literature’, 
Arabica 46 (1999): 193–210.
35. G. H. A. Juynboll, ‘Muslim’s Introduction to his Ṣaḥīḥ’, Jerusalem Studies in Arabic 
and Islam 5 (1984): 263–311, at 265.
36. On topics represented in Aḥmad’s Musnad, see Christopher Melchert, ‘The 
Musnad of Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal’, Der Islam 82 (2005): 32–51, at 45.
37. Figure from al-Sarakhsī based on Khalīl al-Mays, Fahāris al-Mabsūṭ (Beirut: Dār 
al-Maʿrifah, 1400/1980). Figures from al-Jaṣṣāṣ and Ibn Māzah provided by 
Salman Younas, ‘The Ḥanafī School: a Study of its Social and Legal Dimensions, 
189/805–340/952’, DPhil. dissertation, University of Oxford, 2018, 77–8.
38. Joseph Schacht, The Origins of Muhammadan Jurisprudence (Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1950). For the current state of the question, see Christopher Melchert, 
‘Basra and Kufa as the Earliest Centers of Islamic Legal Controversy’, in Behnam 
Sadeghi, Asad Q. Ahmed, Adam Silverstein and Robert G. Hoyland (eds), Islamic 
Cultures, Islamic Contexts: Essays in Honor of Professor Patricia Crone, Islamic 
History and Civilization, Studies and Texts, 114 (Leiden: Brill, 2015), 173–94.
39. Muḥammad ibn Naṣr al-Marwazī, Ikhtilāf al-ʿulamāʾ, ed. Ṣubḥī al-Sāmarrāʾī 
(Beirut: ʿĀlam al-Kutub, 1405/1985).
40. For example, Muḥammad Rawwās Qalʿah’jī, Mawsūʿat fiqh Ibrāhīm al-Nakhaʿī, 
Silsilat mawsūʿāt fiqh al-salaf 8, 2 vols (Beirut: Dār al-Nafāʾis, 1406/1986); 

 66 ] 
Christopher Melchert
Muḥammad Rawwās Qalʿah’jī, Mawsūʿat fiqh Sufyān al-Thawrī, Silsilat mawsūʿāt 
fiqh al-salaf 10 (Beirut: Dār al-Nafāʾis, 1410/1990).
41. Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal (attrib.), K. al-ʿIlal wa-maʿrifat al-rijāl, ed. Waṣī Allāh ibn 
Muḥammad ʿAbbās, 4 vols (Beirut: al-Maktab al-Islāmī, 1988), 3:480 = K. al-Jāmiʿ 
fī al-ʿilal wa-maʿrifat al-rijāl, ed. Muḥammad Ḥusām Bayḍūn, 2 vols (Beirut: 
Muʾassasat al-Kutub al-Thaqāfīyah, 1410/1990), 2:276. References to the latter 
edition are henceforth in italics.
42. Ibn Abī Ḥātim, Jarḥ 1:262.
43. Abū Nuʿaym, Ḥilyat al-awliyā’, 10 vols (Cairo: Maṭbaʿat al-Saʿādah, 1352–7/ 1932–8).
44. Schacht, Origins of Muhammadan Jurisprudence, 242. Hans-Peter Raddatz reviews 
Sufyān al-Thawrī’s Kufan connections and remarks that three-quarters of the 
hadith in the extant Kitāb al-Farāʾiḍ attributed to him come from Kufan shaykhs. 
He also remarks some inclination away from Kufan Shiʿism, towards relative 
rationalism, under the influence of the Basran tradition, especially through 
Ayyūb al-Sakhtiyānī (d. 133/751?) and ʿAbd Allāh ibn ʿAwn (d. 151/768–9?). 
See Raddatz, ‘Frühislamisches Erbrecht nach dem Kitāb al-Farāʾiḍ des Sufyān 
at-Thawrī’, Die Welt des Islams 13 (1971): 26–78, esp. 25–8, 71–5.
45. Kawsaj, Masāʾil al-imām Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal wa-Isḥāq ibn Rāhūyah, ed. Abū 
al-Ḥusayn Khālid ibn Maḥmūd al-Rabāṭ, Wiʾām al-Ḥawshī and Jumʿah Fatḥī, 
2 vols (Riyadh: Dār al-Hijrah, 1425/2004), 2:588–9; Ḥarb al-Kirmānī, Masāʾil 
al-imām Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn Ḥanbal wa-Isḥāq ibn Rāhūyah, ed. Nāṣir ibn 
Suʿūd ibn ʿAbd Allāh al-Salāmah (Riyadh: Maktabat al-Rushd, 1425/2004), 426.
46. On the Ḥanafi presence in Marw, see Christopher Melchert, ‘The Spread of 
Ḥanafism to Khurasan and Transoxania’, in A. C. S. Peacock and D. G. Tor 
(eds), Medi eval Central Asia and the Persianate World, I. B. Tauris and BIPS Persian 
Studies, 7 (London: I. B. Tauris, 2015), 13–30, esp. 14–15; also Wilferd Madelung, 
‘The Early Murjiʾa in Khurāsān and Transoxania and the spread of Ḥanafism’, 
Der Islam 59 (1982): 32–9.
47. Benedikt Reinert, Die Lehre vom tawakkul in der klassischen Sufik, Studien zur 
Sprache, Geschichte und Kultur des islamischen Orients, ed. Bertold Spuler, 3 
(Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1968), 143, 220, 257.
48. Al-Sarrāj, The Kitáb al-Lumaʿ fi ’l-taṣawwuf, ed. Reynold Alleyne Nicholson, E. J. 
W. Gibb Memorial, 22 (Leiden and London: Brill and Luzac, 1914), 196, cited by 
Reinert, Lehre, 220.
49. Abū Bakr al-Khallāl, K. al-Ḥathth ʿalá al-tijārah wa-al-ṣināʿah wa-al-ʿamal, ed. Abū 
ʿAbd Allāh Maḥmūd ibn Muḥammad al-Ḥaddād, Bulūgh al-amānī min al-ajzāʾ 
wa-al-amālī 2, Masāʾil Aḥmad, 1 (Riyadh: Dār al-ʿĀṣi mah, 1407), 144, cited by 
Reinert, Lehre, 257.
50. Muḥāsibī, al-Makāsib, in al-Masāʾil fī aʿmāl al-qulūb wa-al-jawāriḥ wa-al-makāsib 
wa-al-ʿaql, ed. ʿAbd al-Qādir Aḥmad ʿAṭā (Cairo: ʿĀlam al-Kutub, 1969), 212. 
On inkār al-kasb and early Sufis, see also Christopher Melchert, ‘Baṣran Origins 
of Classical Sufism’, Der Islam 82 (2005): 221–40, at 231–2, and Josef van Ess, 
Theologie und Gesellschaft im 2. und 3. Jahrhundert Hidschra, 6 vols (Berlin: Walter 
de Gruyter, 1991–5), 3:130–45, 4:88–94, on ṣūfīyat al-muʿtazilah.
51. Johann Fück, ‘Some Hitherto Unpublished Texts on the Muʿtazilite Movement 

  
Ibn Al-Mubārak, Traditionist  
[ 67
from Ibn al-Nadīm’s Kitāb-al-Fihrist’, in S. M. Abdullah (ed.), Professor Muhammad 
Shafīʿ Presentation Volume (Lahore: Majlis-e-Armughān-e-ʿIlmī, 1955), 51–74, at 
71, 73. One of Ibn al-Mubārak’s Kufan contemporaries, Wakīʿ (d. 197/812?), had 
already come to a similar conclusion: ‘If a man swore to eat nothing but the licit, 
wear nothing but the licit, and not walk except in the licit, we would tell him, 
“Take off your clothes and throw yourself into the Euphrates.” . . . The purely 
licit we do not know today . . . The world has the status of carrion: take from it 
what will sustain you’ (Abū Nuʿaym, Ḥilyah 8:370). Similarly, Yūsuf ibn Asbāṭ 
(d. 195/810–11) said, ‘If a man were, as to leaving the world, like Abū Dharr, 
Salmān and Abū al-Dardāʾ, we still would not call him a renunciant, for renun-
ciation concerns only the purely licit, whereas the purely licit is unknown today’ 
(Abū Nuʿaym, Ḥilyah 8:238).
52. Khallāl, Ḥathth, 143–4.
53. Khallāl, Ḥathth, 143–4.
54. Ibn al-Mubārak, Zuhd, 197 189; cited by Reinert, Lehre, 143.
55. Also related through Ibn al-Mubārak in Tirmidhī, al-Jāmiʿ al-ṣaḥīḥ, al-zuhd 33, bāb 
fī al-tawakkul, No. 2344; through Ibn Lahīʿah in Ibn Mājah, al-Sunan, al-zuhd 14, 
bāb al-tawakkul wa-al-yaqīn, No. 4164. Another version quoting ʿĪsá, and closer to 
the New Testament, is at Ibn al-Mubārak, Zuhd, No. 848.
56. Khallāl, Ḥathth, 142. Confirmed by Ṣāliḥ ibn Aḥmad, Masāʾil al-imām Aḥmad 
ibn Ḥanbal, ed. Ṭāriq ibn ʿAwad Allāh ibn Muḥammad (Riyadh: Dār al-Waṭan, 
1420/1999), 115, where Aḥmad is asked about a group who make no effort (lā 
yaʿmalūn) while saying they are practising tawakkul. He responds that they are 
innovators (mubtadiʿah).
57. See n. 48. Ibn al-Mubārak also appears in one isnād that I have noticed, relat-
ing Ibn Mujāhid’s gloss of Q. 2:267, ‘spend some of the good things you have 
acquired’ as ‘trade (tijārah)’: Khallāl, Ḥathth, 70.
58. Abū Nuʿaym, Ḥilyat 8:166–7.
59. Ibn Abī Ḥātim, Jarḥ 1:278.
60. Al-Qushayrī, Al-Qushayri’s Epistle on Sufism, trans. Alexander D. Knysh, rev. 
Muhammad Eissa, Great Books of Islamic Civilisation (Reading: Garnet, 2007), 
136, § on zuhd.
61. Ibn Abī Yaʿlá, Ṭabaqāt al-ḥanābilah, ed. Muḥam mad Ḥāmid al-Fiqī, 2 vols 
(Cairo: Maṭ baʿat al-Sunnah al-Muḥammadīyah, 1371/1952), 2:40 = ed. ʿAbd 
al-Raḥmān ibn Sulaymān al-ʿUthay mīn, 2 vols (n.p.: al-Amānah al-ʿām mah 
lil-iḥtifāl bi-murūr miʾat ʿām ʿalá taʾsīs al-mamlakah, 1419/1999), 3:72; Louis 
Massignon, Recueil de texts inédits concernant l’histoire de la mystique en pays d’Islam, 
Collection de texts inédits relatives á la mystique musulmane, 1 (Paris: Paul 
Geuthner, 1929), 212–14 (excerpt from Ẓāhirīyah majāmiʿ 13). On the attribu-
tion of the creed, see Christopher Melchert, ‘The Ḥanābila and the Early Sufis’, 
Arabica 48 (2001): 352–67, at 361–2; Christopher Melchert, ‘The Creeds of Aḥmad 
Ibn Ḥanbal’, with Saud Al-Sarhan, in Robert Gleave (ed.), Books and Bibliophiles: 
Studies in Honour of Paul Auchterlonie on the Bio-bibliography of the Muslim World 
(n.p.: Gibb Memorial Trust, 2014), 29–50, at 49–50; and Encyclopaedia of Islam, 3rd 
edn, s.v. ‘Ghulām Khalīl’, by Maher Jarrar.

 68 ] 
Christopher Melchert
62. Abū Nuʿaym, Ḥilyat 8:168.
63. Ibn Abī Ḥātim, Jarḥ 1:273.
64. ʿAbd Allāh ibn Aḥmad, K. al-Sunnah, ed. ʿAbd Allāh ibn Ḥasan ibn Ḥusayn 
(Mecca: al-Maṭbaʿah al-Salafīyah, 1349), 131 = ed. Abū Hājir Muḥammad Saʿīd 
ibn Basyūnī Zaghlūl (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 1405/1985), 149.
65. Aḥmad, ʿIlal 3:486 2:278. ʿAmr ibn Thābit was a Kufan client (d. 172/788–9) 
accused of rafḍ, on whom, see Ibn Ḥajar, Tahdhīb al-Tahdhīb, 12 vols (Hyderabad: 
Majlis Dāʾirat al-Maʿārif al-Niẓāmīyah, 1325–7, repr. Beirut: Dār Ṣādir, n.d.), 
8:9–10.
66. Al-Mizzī, Tahdhīb al-Kamāl fī asmāʾ al-rijāl, ed. Bashshār ʿAwwād Maʿrūf, 35 vols 
(Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Risālah, 1413/1992), 16:6–10. On ʿAwf al-Aʿrābī (Basran, 
d. 147/764–5?), see Ibn Ḥajar, Tahdhīb 8:166–7.
67. Al-Kindī, The Governors and Judges of Egypt, ed. Rhuvon Guest, E. J. W. Gibb 
Memorial, 19 (Leiden: Brill, 1912), 369; al-Dhahabī, Tārīkh al-islām, ed. ʿUmar 
ʿAbd al-Salām Tadmurī, 52 vols (Beirut: Dār al-Kitāb al-ʿArabī, 1407–21/1987–
2000), 11 (171–180 H.): 224–5.
68. Ibn Abī Ḥātim, Jarḥ 1:271, with the gloss ‘His imperfection has become manifest 
(qad ẓaharat ʿawratuh).’
69. Ibn Abī Ḥātim, Jarḥ 1:274. There may also have been some element here of pious 
fear that aspersing traditionists amounted to ghībah (slander), on which, see 
Christopher Melchert, ‘Early Renunciants as Ḥadīth Transmitters’, Muslim World 
92 (2002): 407–18, at 413–14.
70. Ibn al-Nadīm, Fihrist, fann 6, maqālah 6 = Kitâb al-Fihrist, ed. Gustav Flügel, with 
Johannes Roedigger and August Mueller (Leipzig: F. C. W. Vogel, 1872), 228.
71. Aḥmad, ʿIlal 1:272, 2:361 1:114, 327.
72. ʿAbd al-Razzāq, al-Tafsīr, ed. ʿAbd al-Muʿṭī Amīn Qalʿajī, 2 vols (Beirut: Dār 
al-Maʿrifah, 1411/1991), 1:105, ad Q. 2:225.
73. Bukhārī, al-Imām ʿAbd Allāh, 235–56 (men he counted trustworthy), 257–308 (men 
he aspersed), 309 (his prominence).
74. Ibn Ḥajar, Tahdhīb 4:202.
75. Sezgin, Geschichte des arabischen Schrifttums (GAS) 1:95, No. 4. The Ẓāhirīyah 
unicum does appear in Najm ʿAbd al-Raḥmān Khalaf, Istidrākāt ʿalá Tārīkh 
al-turāth al-ʿarabī li-Fuʾād Sizgīn fī ʿilm al -ḥadīth, Maktabat Niẓām Yaʿqūbī 
al-Khāṣṣah-Baḥrayn, Dirāsāt wa-buḥūth 1 (Beirut: Dār al-Bashāʾir al-Islāmīyah, 
1421/2000), 84.
76. Ibn Ḥajar, al-Muʿjam al-mufahras, ed. Muḥammad Shakūr Maḥmūd al-Ḥājjī 
Umrayr al-Mayādīnī (Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Risālah, 1418/1998), 84, No. 233; 
al-Suyūṭī, Anshāb al-kuthub fī ansāb al -kutub, ed. Ibrāhīm Bājis ʿAbd al-Majīd, 
Taḥqīq al-turāth 31 (Riyadh: Markaz al-Malik Fayṣal lil-Buḥūth wa-al-Dirāsāt 
al-Islāmīyah, 1437/2016), 190.
77. Ibn Ḥajar, Muʿjam, 87, No. 251.
78. Sezgin, GAS 1:95, No. 3; Khalaf, Istidrākāt, 84.
79. Melchert, ‘Ibn al-Mubārak’s Kitāb al-Jihād’, 54. I go on there to compare the 
approximately 350 hadith reports in each of Bukhārī’s Ṣaḥīḥ and Aḥmad’s 
Musnad. This estimate of 350 in Bukhārī’s Ṣaḥīḥ is evidently erroneous. Sezgin’s 

  
Ibn Al-Mubārak, Traditionist  
[ 69
numbers add up to 218, the modern author Bukhārī proposes 212, I would now 
say 227 based on paging directly through the Ṣaḥīḥ. Cf. M. Fuad Sezgin, Buhârî’nin 
kaynakları, Ankara Üniversitesi İlâhiyat Fakültesi yayınlarından, 13 (Istanbul: 
Ibrahim Horoz Basimevi, 1956), index; Bukhārī, al-Imām ʿAbd Allāh, 178–9. 
Sāmarrāʾī continually points his name Ḥabbān ibn Mūsá, but I follow rather Ibn 
Ḥajar, Tabṣīr al-muntabih, ed. ʿAlī Muḥammad al-Bijāwī, rev. Muḥammad ʿAlī 
al-Najjār, Turāthunā, 4 vols (Cairo: al-Dār al-Miṣrīyah, 1964?–7, repr. Beirut: 
al-Maktabah al-ʿIlmīyah, n.d.), 1:278.
80. Ibn al-Mubārak, al-Musnad, ed. Muṣṭafá ʿUthmān Muḥammad, with K. al-Birr 
wa-al-ṣilah (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 1411/1991).
81. Ibn al-Mubārak, al-Musnad, ed. Ṣubḥī al-Badrī al-Sāmarrāʾī (Riyadh: Maktabat 
al-Maʿārif, 1407/1987).
82. Ibn al-Nadīm, Fihrist, fann 6, maqālah 6 = Kitâb al-Fihrist, ed. Gustav Flügel, with 
Johannes Roedigger and August Mueller (Leipzig: F. C. W. Vogel, 1872), 228.
83. See nn. 1, 19.
84. Some mistakes are identified in a master’s thesis by Saʿīd ibn ʿAlī ibn ʿAbd 
Allāh Āl Nāshiʿ al-Asmarī, ‘Kitāb al-Zuhd wa-al-raqāʾiq’, Jāmiʿat Umm al-Qurá, 
1423/2012, 8–9 (accessed 11 April 2017, available at: http://libback.uqu.edu.sa/
hipres/FUTXT/13555.pdf). But this thesis covers only part of the text and com-
pares only the Carullah manuscript. The two Leipzig manuscripts are described 
by K. Vollers, Katalog der Handschriften der Universitäts-Bibliothek zu Leipzig 2: Die 
islamischen, christlich-orientalischen, jüdischen und Samaritanischen Handschriften 
(Leipzig: Otto Harrassowitz, 1906), 82–5. The second is definitely the recension 
of al-Ḥusayn al-Marwazī, but Vollers’ table of contents differs more widely from 
the printed version than the table of contents for the first, confirming that section 
titles are liable to be added and modified by copyists.

 [ 70 ]
CHAPTER
4
Early ‘Traditionist Sufis’: 
A Network Analysis
Jeremy Farrell
Introduction
Roy P. Mottahedeh’s Loyalty and Leadership in an Early Islamic Society articu-
lates a widely cited model of societal cohesion during the late-ʿAbbasid and 
Buyid periods, a time typified by rapid institutional segmentation and wide-
spread sectarian antipathies.1 In the broadest theoretical sense, Loyalty and 
Leadership examines how the conditions that engender group-level speciali-
sation and differentiation motivate cooperation or competition. In a series of 
astute case studies, Mottahedeh highlights a pervasive ethos of ‘negative loy-
alties’ as a barrier to the success of various actors in building and maintain-
ing collaborative ventures.2 This chapter joins the debate over the dynamics 
of co-evolutionary social processes during the third and fourth/ninth and 
tenth centuries by examining the case of cooperation between hadith special-
ists and Sufis.
By the end of the sixth/twelfth century, mass participation in hadith trans-
mission and Sufi ritual had become dominant features of the intellectual 
and practical landscape of Sunnism.3 The later situation appears to contrast 
sharply with an earlier period when hadith specialists and Sufis are thought 
to have found little common ground.4 This model of the diachronic devel-
opment of relations between hadith specialists and Sufis, which I term the 
‘split–reconciliation hypothesis’, has appeared in various forms; few have 
articulated its elements with the erudition of Christopher Melchert. In one 
study of the differentiation of these groups, Melchert echoes the negative-
loyalties thesis in his contention that hadith specialists and Sufis achieved 
only a modicum of comity near the end of the fourth/tenth century, after 
‘ha[ving] been separated for more than a century’.5 Even then, he is able to 
marshal only tacit evidence of shared orientations. Thus, whereas intensive 
time commitments were the norm for becoming a leading hadith expert 
or Sufi in the third/ninth century – memorising hundreds of thousands of 

  
Early ‘Traditionist Sufis’  
[ 71
reports or performing ‘heroic’ acts of worship, respectively – by the fourth/
tenth century, ‘it presumably became easier again to pursue both hadith and 
renunciation’.6 In Melchert’s view, this rapprochement occurred thanks to 
both the rise of ‘authoritative’ hadith works, such as the Ṣaḥīḥayn of Abū 
ʿAbd Allāh al-Bukhārī (d. 256/870) and Muslim ibn al-Ḥajjāj (d. 261/875), 
and the widespread acceptance amongst the Sufis of a type of piety that 
 prioritised an ‘inward moral attitude’.7
This account sketches the principal components of the split– reconciliation 
hypothesis with admirable concision. However, this model of early hadith-
specialist and Sufi conflict evinces several distinct weaknesses. The first is 
historiographical, given that Melchert draws his evidence for early Sufis’ 
activity from prosopographical works that were composed in the late 
fourth/tenth century or afterward, such as Abū ʿAbd al-Raḥmān al-Sulamī’s 
(d. 412/1021) Ṭabaqāt al-ṣūfīyah and Abū Nuʿaym al-Iṣfahānī’s (d. 430/1038) 
Ḥilyat al-awliyāʾ wa-ṭabaqāt al-aṣfiyāʾ. While this lag should not automatically 
disqualify such material as unreliable, Melchert elsewhere admits that the 
choice of these sources is motivated by ‘convenience’ as much as historic-
ity.8 The nature of this evidence of a split, in turn, weakens the force of the 
arguments related to the alleged reconciliation. As for the motivation for a 
détente between the two sides, the assumption of widespread acknowledge-
ment of the authority of the Ṣaḥīḥayn in hadith-specialist circles, much less 
among Sufis, cannot be taken for granted, as Jonathan A. C. Brown has per-
suasively argued in his seminal study of the ‘canonisation’ of these works.9 
Additionally, Melchert ‘presumes’, rather than demonstrates, that new devel-
opments such as the cultivation of an ‘inward’ piety induced the erstwhile 
opponents to combine their efforts. While none of these objections individu-
ally renders the split–reconciliation hypothesis untenable, it is equally true 
that consequential details of the relations between the hadith-specialist and 
Sufi communities that it presupposes remain under-substantiated.
Here, I propose an alternative, novel model of early collaboration between 
hadith specialists and Sufis. Over the past quarter of a century, fresh 
primary material that bears directly on the split–reconciliation hypothesis 
has become available with the publication of several minor hadith works by 
Sufis who flourished in the late third/ninth and first half of the fourth/tenth 
centuries. Analysis of the data in these works and a computational examina-
tion of prosopographical evidence suggests that these influential early Sufis 
developed durable strategies for cooperating with contemporary élite hadith 
scholars.
This argument proceeds in three parts. The first section identifies impor-
tant points of contact during the third–fourth/ninth–tenth centuries between 
the hadith specialists and Sufis, a category of actor that Ahmet Karamustafa 
has aptly termed the ‘traditionist Sufi’.10 These early traditionist Sufis are 
typified by their reputation as prominent local Sufis and for their varying 
levels of renown as scholars of hadith. The second section identifies instances 
in the split–reconciliation hypothesis wherein evidence of early traditionist 

 72 ] 
Jeremy Farrell
Sufis’ activity has been misconstrued or unduly marginalised. Finally, the 
statistical analysis of a network comprising both early élite hadith specialists 
(ḥuffāẓ; sg. ḥāfiẓ) and traditionist Sufis suggests that: (1) the hadith-transmis-
sion network suffered a significant disruption in its stratum of maximum 
activity, that of the ḥuffāẓ, in the first half of the fourth/tenth century, when 
the early traditionist Sufis studied here were active; and (2) during this 
period, early traditionist Sufis were able to construct a distinctive niche for 
their activities in the hadith-transmission network, despite never influencing 
the development of hadith transmission in the same measure as the ḥuffāẓ.
Early Traditionist Sufis
The focus of this study rests on the interstitial role of five early tradition-
ist Sufis: Abū al-ʿAbbās Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn Masrūq al-Ṭūsī (d. 298 
or 299/911–13); Abū Saʿīd Aḥmad ibn Muhammad ibn Ziyād ibn al-Aʿrābī 
(d. 340/952); Abū Muḥammad Jaʿfar ibn Muḥammad ibn Nuṣayr al-Khuldī 
(d. 348/959); Abū ʿAmr Ismāʿīl ibn Nujayd (d. 366/976–7?); and Abū ʿAbd 
Allāh Aḥmad ibn ʿAṭāʾ al-Rūdhbārī (d. 369/980).11 This section briefly intro-
duces these figures’ Sufi and ahl al-ḥadīth credentials, specifically highlight-
ing their composition of minor hadith works.
Ibn Masrūq was born around 215/830–1, according to the reckoning of 
al-Khaṭīb al-Baghdādī (d. 463/1071).12 After moving to Baghdad, probably 
in his teenage years, he made the acquaintance of influential Sufis and their 
affiliates, such as al-Ḥārith ibn Asad al-Muḥāsibī (d. 243/857–8), al-Sarī 
al-Saqaṭī (d. 253/867), and Abū al-Qāsim al-Junayd (d. 297/910–11), as both 
al-Sulamī in his Ṭabaqāt and Abū Nuʿaym in Ḥilyat al-awliyāʾ report.13 An 
account in the latter source illustrates the esteem Ibn Masrūq was accorded by 
his Sufi contemporaries. When al-Junayd in a dream asks a group of ‘surro-
gates’ (qawman min al-abdāl), ‘Is there any in Baghdad who is one of the saints 
(awliyāʾ)?’ they identify Ibn Masrūq.14 Prior to his establishment of Sufi con-
tacts, Ibn Masrūq studied with some of the most prominent hadith specialists 
in Baghdad, including ʿAlī ibn al-Madīnī (d. 234/849) and Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal 
(d. 241/855); he would go on to teach the Shāfiʿī jurist and ḥāfiẓ, Abū Bakr 
Muḥammad ibn ʿAbd Allāh al-Ṣayrafī (d. 330/942). In spite of this association 
with such prestigious figures, Ibn Masrūq was not admired by later hadith 
experts: ʿAlī al-Dāraquṭnī (d. 385/995) declared him to be ‘not strong, trans-
mitting problematic reports (muʿḍilāt)’; Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī (d. 852/1449) 
repeats the charge in Lisān al-Mīzān.15 Ibn Masrūq is credited with expertise 
on rubāʿīyāt, a contemporary genre of profane love poetry: his notice in Tārīkh 
Baghdād highlights his discourses on the subject of love.16 A single work of his, 
titled al-Qanāʿah (‘Equanimity’), appears to have circulated amongst hadith 
specialists through the time of Aḥmad al-Dhahabī (d. 748/1348).17 Because 
this work is not known to be extant, one can only speculate as to its contents, 
although nine lines from a love poem allegedly quoted from it appear in Ṣalāḥ 
al-Dīn al-ʿAlāʾī’s (d. 761/1359–60) Ithārat al-fawāʾid al-majmūʿah.18

  
Early ‘Traditionist Sufis’  
[ 73
Ibn al-Aʿrābī was a native of Basra who taught in Damascus and eventu-
ally moved to the Ḥijāz, where he became, in al-Dhahabī’s view, the ‘chief 
scholar of Mecca’ (shaykh al-ḥaram).19 As a Sufi, he is most celebrated for com-
piling a now-lost prosopographical work, Ṭabaqāt al-nussāk, as Alexander 
Knysh notes in a recent encyclopaedia entry.20 Regrettably, Knysh’s bib-
liography fails to include references to a substantial body of primary and 
secondary literature concerning his subject. Ibn al-Aʿrābī’s most significant 
influence on the course of Sufism is a legacy of Andalusian students who 
transmitted several works that appear to be lost, as can be gathered from Ibn 
Khayr al-Ishbīlī’s (d. 575/1179) Fahrasah and other bibliographic works.21 As 
a student of hadith, Ibn al-Aʿrābī cultivated a close relationship with Abū 
Dāwūd al-Sijistānī (d. 275/889) and transmitted recensions of the latter’s 
Sunan and Kitāb al-zuhd.22 Among his most famous students was the ḥāfiẓ 
Ibn Mandah (d. 395/1005).23 Ibn al-Aʿrābī’s younger contemporary Abū 
al-Qāsim al-Ṭabarānī (d. 360/971) rated him ‘trustworthy’ (thiqah), with 
the proviso that he was prone to ‘harmless mistakes’ (awhām lā taḍurru).24 
Uniquely among the figures studied here, al-Dhahabī included Ibn al-Aʿrābī 
in his Tadhkirat al-ḥuffāẓ.25 A number of Ibn al-Aʿrābī’s works are extant and 
have been published, including a voluminous accounting of his instruc-
tors in the sciences of hadith, variously titled Kitāb al-Muʿjam or Muʿjam Ibn 
al-Aʿrābī.26 In addition to his transmission of a Companion-centric recension 
of Abū Dāwūd’s Kitāb al-Zuhd,27 he compiled his own work on the topic. This 
has been published twice in Egypt, first by Majdī Fatḥī al-Sayyid, and later 
by Khadīja Muḥammad Kāmil.28
Al-Khuldī was a native of Baghdad who is recorded as having performed 
the ḥajj fifty-six times.29 As a Sufi, al-Khuldī’s fame rests on two prominent 
contributions to the historiography of the group. Like Ibn al-Aʿrābī, he is also 
credited with having written a prosopographical work on Sufis, now lost; a 
possible reference to the contents of this book is preserved in the Fihrist of 
Ibn al-Nadīm (d. 380/990?), who reports that he had an autograph copy of 
a work by al-Khuldī.30 Relatedly, al-Khuldī’s transmission of a significant 
number of the sayings of his teacher al-Junayd substantially affected the lat-
ter’s reputation for mystical ‘sobriety’ (ṣaḥw); he was also a close follower of 
Ibn Masrūq.31 In addition to these literary interests, al-Khuldī was an active 
participant in hadith transmission. In Tadhkirat al-ḥuffāẓ, al-Dhahabī classes 
him as ‘one of the great teachers of the world’ (min mashāyikh al-dunyā) in 
a recounting of Abū Nuʿaym al-Iṣfahānī’s early tutors.32 Al-Khuldī also 
transmitted to al-Dāraquṭnī,33 who, along with al-Ḥākim al-Nīsabūrī (d. 
405/1014) and al-Khaṭīb al-Baghdādī, rated him thiqah.34 Al-Khuldī’s extant 
works supply additional details about his career. For instance, he taught at 
the royal Friday mosque (jāmiʿ al-Manṣūr) in Baghdad: Nabīl Saʿd al-Dīn 
Jarrār has published records of four of these sessions dated to 337/948–9.35 
Another lecture, titled al-Fawāʾid wa-al-zuhd wa-al-raqāʾiq wa-al-marāthī, con-
tains hadith as well as other narrative material and was also edited by Majdī 
Fatḥī al-Sayyid Ibrāhīm.36 This work circulated in Baghdad and Damascus; 

 74 ] 
Jeremy Farrell
in the latter, the ḥāfiẓ Jamāl al-Dīn al-Mizzī (d. 742/1342) transmitted it to 
al-Dhahabī, who appears to confirm this in a remark that he possessed a copy 
of al-Khuldī’s dictations (majālis amālīh).37
Ibn Nujayd was a Nishapuri scholar and mystic. His reputation for piety 
and scholarship was such that Ibn al-Jawzī (d. 597/1201) would indelibly 
memorialise him as ‘the lordly traditionist’ (al-muḥaddith al-rabbānī).38 His 
main contribution to the history of Sufism is the bequest to his grandson 
al-Sulamī of a sizable library.39 This material may have been acquired 
during Ibn Nujayd’s early travels, which took him to Rayy and Baghdad; 
in the latter, he studied hadith with ʿAbd Allāh ibn Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal 
(d. 290/903).40 His student al-Ḥākim rated him thiqah.41 As an author, Ibn 
Nujayd compiled a fascicle (juzʾ) which, like al-Khuldī’s al-Fawāʾid, reached 
al-Dhahabī; the latter judged this to have been amongst the highest quality 
hadith works in his possession.42 The text has been published twice, first as 
part of a collection edited by Khallāf Maḥmūd ʿAbd al-Samīʿ and again by 
Bilal Orfali and Gerhard Böwering.43
Less is known about al-Rūdhbārī, who travelled widely and died in 
Manwāth (modern Lebanon).44 Al-Sulamī identifies him as ‘the shaykh of the 
Levant’ and as the nephew of another prominent Baghdadi Sufi, Abū ʿAlī 
al-Rūdhbārī (d. 322/935–6).45 Otherwise, neither al-Sulamī nor Abū Nuʿaym 
associates him by name with other Sufis, although he was a prominent inform-
ant for Abū Naṣr al-Ṭūsī, author of a famous theoretical work on Sufism, 
Kitāb al-Lumaʿ fī al-taṣawwuf.46 As for al-Rūdhbārī’s reputation in hadith 
circles, al-Khaṭīb al-Baghdādī judged him harshly for transmitting hadiths 
in a severely incorrect manner (rawá aḥādīth ghalaṭan fāḥishan); Ibn Ḥajar 
repeats al-Khaṭīb’s charge and gives the correct death date, but mistakenly 
refers to al-Rūdhbārī by his uncle’s teknonym (kunyah).47 Despite this judge-
ment, al-Rūdhbārī was well-known to at least two prominent ḥuffāẓ, having 
studied under al-Qāḍī Ismāʿīl ibn al-Ḥusayn al-Maḥāmilī (d. 330/942) and 
teaching Abū ʿAbd Allāh Muḥammad al-Ṣūrī (d. 441/1049). Like al-Khuldī, 
the younger al-Rūdhbārī lectured on hadith at a jāmiʿ, though in Ṣūr; Bernd 
Radtke has published a record of three such lectures in a recent volume.48
To better understand the importance of these individuals as exponents 
of both the Sufi and hadith-specialist communities, an examination of why 
they have not figured prominently in previous studies proves instructive.49 
The next section relates how evidence of early traditionist Sufis’ status and 
activity in hadith transmission has been misapprehended or downplayed in 
order to highlight discrete aspects of the split–reconciliation hypothesis of 
interaction between these two groups.
The ‘Split–Reconciliation Hypothesis’ Revisited
As a paradigm for understanding hadith-specialist and Sufi relations, the 
split–reconciliation hypothesis posits two essential stages: an initial, sharp 
rift between the two parties, followed by an eventual rapprochement. Under 

  
Early ‘Traditionist Sufis’  
[ 75
scrutiny, it becomes evident that this model operates according to three key 
assumptions: non-overlapping membership, especially at the élite level; 
non-overlapping methodologies or epistemologies; and the importance of 
a single individual who effectively closed the rift between the two sides. 
However, much scholarship develops a specific thesis concerning only one of 
these elements independently from the others; therefore, it will be useful to 
pull together the arguments for this model to evaluate their merits.
Although several scholars have contributed to the split–reconciliation 
model, Melchert’s studies are remarkable for their detailed presentation of 
an initial cleavage, based primarily on prosopographical evidence. In one 
study, based on a comparison of Sufi prosopography and hadith-centric rijāl 
literature, he finds negative evidence of substantial overlap of the groups’ 
memberships. That is, ‘outstanding hadith transmitters from the tenth 
century onward were seldom outstanding Sufis, and likewise outstanding 
Sufis were seldom outstanding experts in hadith’.50 In some cases, Melchert 
claims to have found evidence that early Sufis, ‘oppose[d] outright the col-
lection and transmission of hadith’.51 Additionally, Melchert contends that a 
significant split took place between the early Sufis and Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal 
and his early successors, the Ḥanābilah, some of whom were leading hadith 
specialists.52 Recep Şentürk elaborates Melchert’s prosopographical explora-
tions through the conceptual lens of ‘interdomain brokerage’ among ḥuffāẓ, 
identifying instances where an individual ḥāfiẓ was also recognised as an 
expert in another field (for example: grammar or poetry).53 In the result-
ing analysis, Şentürk finds that only a single ḥāfiẓ, apparently Ibn al-Aʿrābī, 
exhibited inter-domain brokerage between the Sufi and hadith-specialist net-
works before the year 349/960. This finding does not appear to be confined 
to Sufis, as only about 14 per cent (178/1226) of all ḥuffāẓ exhibited excellence 
in more than one domain.54
Given the low rate of inter-domain brokerage between Sufis and hadith 
specialists, several scholars have concentrated on describing the factors 
that drove the apparent split. Brown, for one, identifies an interest in the 
technicalities of hadith as a crucial boundary marker between the two 
groups. In agreement with Louis Masignon and Hamid Algar concern-
ing the type of hadith favoured by Sufis and other mystics like al-Ḥusayn 
ibn Manṣūr al-Ḥallāj (ex. 309/922), Brown further argues that even when 
Sufis did concern themselves with genres of hadith, their preference for 
reports that were dubiously ‘divine’ in provenance (hadith qudsī) or ‘loose’ 
(mursal) defied the rigorous standards of validity set by the hadith special-
ists.55 Lahcen Daäif extends this argument by acknowledging the hadith-
specialist credentials of al-Sulamī and Abū Nuʿaym, while simultaneously 
accusing them of circumventing the criteria for al-jarḥ wa-al-taʿdīl (‘trans-
mitter criticism’) in order to rehabilitate feeble scholars or blatant forgers.56 
Additionally, Brown maintains that Sufis’ intellectual interest in living isnāds 
linking the individual with the Prophet concerned not the transmission of 
the example of the Prophet and Companions, but of a khirqah, a distinctive 

 76 ] 
Jeremy Farrell
initiatory garment.57 He supports this contention through a reference to Ibn 
al-Nadīm’s account in the Fihrist, portraying al-Khuldī’s employment of an 
isnād not as a means for authenticating hadith, but rather for demonstrating 
the unbroken lineage of prominent Sufis ‘from the Prophet’.58
Finally, with respect to the reconciliation stage of this model, numer-
ous scholars have attempted to locate a single individual who brought the 
ongoing rift to a close. A century of scholarship has continually pushed the 
date of this rapprochement earlier. Duncan MacDonald first proposed Abū 
Ḥāmid al-Ghazālī (d. 505/1111) as the synthesiser of Sufi experience and 
‘orthodox’ sensibilities.59 Soon thereafter, Ignaz Goldziher found a forerun-
ner to al-Ghazālī’s example in Abū al-Qāsim al-Qushayrī (d. 465/1072), 
a finding later scrutinised by A. J. Arberry.60 Rkia Cornell argues that 
al-Sulamī almost single-handedly wedded the mystical worldview of Sufism 
to the hadith-philic epistemology of the Shāfiʿī school of law, a process 
she terms the ‘uṣūl-ization’ of Sufism.61 A fully tenth-century reconcilia-
tion is proposed by Florian Sobieroj, who details the exploits of Abū ʿAbd 
Allāh Muḥammad ibn Khafīf al-Shīrāzī (d. 371/982), who attempted to ease 
the agitation between Shirazi hadith specialists and Sufis.62 In Ibn Khafīf, 
Karamustafa finds his first instance of a ‘traditionist Sufi’ and extends the 
sobriquet to Abū al-Ḥasan ʿAlī ibn Jahḍam al-Hamadhānī (d. 414/1023–4).63 
Most recently, Melchert has tentatively cast Ibn al-Aʿrābī as a key harmonis-
ing figure because of his roles as transmitter of Abū Dāwūd’s Sunan and as a 
prominent student of al-Junayd.64
The data that underpin these arguments clearly suggest increasing spe-
cialisation and coherence amongst and between these two movements 
during the third–fourth/ninth–tenth centuries, as Melchert notes.65 This 
being the case, these studies that portray resolutely distant relations between 
early Sufis and their hadith-specialist counterparts until a relatively late date 
consequentially misstate or over-state key evidence for their claims. The fol-
lowing points illustrate this contention through the example of the tradition-
ist Sufis or their close contemporaries, as well as data related to the former 
group’s minor hadith works.
On the issue of the low rate of inter-domain brokerage between hadith 
specialists and Sufis, it must be admitted that the negative evidence that is 
gleaned from a comparison of the respective prosopographical literature is 
compelling. Nevertheless, a simple error sometimes weakens the portrayal 
of certain aspects of a ‘split’. One example of this relates to Melchert’s obser-
vation that many Sufis rejected hadith transmission outright. In support of 
this contention, he relates an anecdote involving al-Khuldī, who is alleged 
to have ‘reminisced that he had not gone to hear ʿAbbās al-Dūrī [a noted 
student of Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal; d. 271/884] in his youth because a Sufi had 
discouraged him’.66 For this report, Melchert cites Tārīkh Baghdād; but in 
fact the text reads: ‘I went to ʿAbbās al-Dūrī while I was young, and I wrote 
down one lesson on his authority’, after which a scuffle occurs between 
al-Khuldī and an anonymous hadith-hostile Sufi.67 While the point stands 

  
Early ‘Traditionist Sufis’  
[ 77
that, in the person of the unnamed foil, some Sufis may have openly dis-
couraged engagement with hadith specialists, other historical figures like 
al-Khuldī proved willing to risk any resulting opprobrium to learn from their 
contemporaries.
Reliance on prosopographical data as indicative of a lack of overlapping 
networks implicates other issues related to the argument from silence; what 
appears to be firm evidence may equally indicate a ‘mismatch’ of salient 
data.68 One example of this comes in the presentation of the intersection of 
Ḥanābilah and Sufi networks. Here, Melchert restricts his attention almost 
exclusively to figures from the first generation (ṭabaqah), of a total of five, 
in al-Sulamī’s Ṭabaqāt, the only exception being al-Junayd, whose notice 
appears in the second generation. This limited scope precludes the consider-
ation of other figures largely contemporary with al-Junayd, who are reliably 
tied both to Sufis and the Ḥanābilah, like Abū al-ʿAbbās ibn ʿAṭāʾ al-Ādamī 
(ex. 309/922), from the third generation.69 At other times, results obtained 
through an argument from silence seem overly restrictive. In the discus-
sion of ‘leading’ Sufis with established relationships with the Ḥanābilah, 
Melchert does not consider Ibn Masrūq and his teachers, Muḥammad ibn 
al-Ḥusayn al-Burjulānī (d. 238/852–3)70 and Muḥammad ibn Manṣūr al-Ṭūsī 
(d. Baghdad, 254/867),71 because of their alleged failure to meet the follow-
ing criteria: association with al-Junayd or his teachers; a record of ‘mystical’ 
rather than ‘ascetical’ sayings; and a legacy of ‘important’ Sufi disciples.72 As 
noted above, Ibn Masrūq’s bona fide relationship with al-Junayd, his status 
as one of the awliyāʾ with an interest in mystical love theory, and his forma-
tive teaching relationship with another important Sufi – al-Khuldī – build a 
strong case for considering his role in maintaining cooperative links with an 
influential cadre of hadith specialists.73
The discussion of discursive differences between Sufis and hadith special-
ists also suffers from intermittent imprecisions. For instance, and contrary 
to Brown’s claim that al-Khuldī’s khirqah-specific isnād reached back ‘to the 
Prophet’, the account given in the Fihrist contains neither a reference to a 
khirqah nor a direct invocation of Muḥammad’s legacy. Instead, al-Khuldī’s 
isnād ends with Anas ibn Mālik (d. c. 91–3/709–12), one of the most 
highly-respected Companions in the eyes of later authorities of hadith.74 
Similarly, the contention that early mystics and Sufis were unconcerned 
with the sophisticated discourse of hadith scholarship is belied by several 
records of such activity. The earliest of these is the Nawādir al-uṣūl fī maʿrifat 
aḥādīth al-rasūl by the important early mystic al-Ḥakīm al-Tirmidhī (d. 
318/936 or 320/938?).75 Similarly, al-Sulamī’s extensive correspondence with 
al-Dāraquṭnī concerning his opinions on transmitters also sheds light on the 
appeal of scrutinising the technicalities of isnāds to at least one important 
Sufi who was active in the fourth/tenth century.76 Despite a seeming lack of 
evidence that the early traditionist Sufis discussed above engaged with tech-
nical issues on this level, the surviving minor hadith works by Ibn al-Aʿrābī, 
al-Khuldī, Ibn Nujayd and al-Rūdhbārī, described above, demonstrate a 

 78 ] 
Jeremy Farrell
concern with transmitting authenticated material (see, Table 4.1). Including 
repetitions, these works contain a total of 362 accounts; approximately 53 per 
cent of these (180) constitute reports about the Prophet or Companions, the 
quality of which hews closely to the criteria espoused by hadith specialists.77 
When judged by the coincidence of reports from the so-called ‘Six Books’ 
accepted by Sunni hadith scholars, or later ‘adjustments’ to the ‘proto-canon’ 
by Ibn Khuzaymah (d. 311/924), al-Ṭabarānī and al-Dāraquṭnī,78 the contents 
of these minor Sufi works certainly must not be dismissed as spurious. In fact, 
almost 80 per cent (107/134) of the Prophetic material in these works accords 
with material in the hadith-specialist corpus. In this regard, it is unsurpris-
ing that later eminent hadith specialists like al-Mizzī and al-Dhahabī found 
otherwise marginal works like al-Khuldī’s and Ibn Nujayd’s to be worthy of 
preservation and transmission.
Finally, these data strongly support the analytical utility of Karamustafa’s 
category of ‘traditionist Sufis’, who were both prominent Sufis and, at the 
least, reliably connected to respected hadith specialists. In fact, rather than 
a single figure effecting the closure of an existing rift, the traditionist Sufis 
expanded upon the initial model of cooperation provided by Ibn Masrūq, 
who was active in élite hadith transmission circles as early as the first half 
of the third/ninth century. However, one should not push these conclu-
sions too far. The scarcity of early traditionist Sufis and the lone example 
of Ibn al-Aʿrābī as a ḥāfiẓ confirms Melchert and Şentürk’s conclusion that 
outstanding hadith transmitters were seldom outstanding Sufis, and vice 
versa. Furthermore, although figures like al-Khuldī devoted themselves to 
both the circle of al-Junayd, and learning and teaching hadith, it is certainly 
possible that some contemporary Sufis or hadith transmitters were discour-
aged from pursuing both specialisations. Nevertheless, the contention that 
by the mid-fourth/tenth century the major factions of the hadith-specialist 
and Sufi movements ‘had been separated for more than a century’, gains a 
useful measure of qualification, insofar as this small contingent of tradition-
ist Sufis replicated successful relations with both sides during this period.
If I have characterised the interpretive strategies of the split– reconciliation 
hypothesis correctly, then it should be clear that persuasive evidence of 
either an all-encompassing rift between the hadith specialists and Sufis, or a 
momentous reunion between them, is lacking. Rather, and in spite of the ten-
sions which may have contributed to the differentiation of Baghdadi Sufism 
and hadith specialists, the example of these early traditionist Sufis suggests 
that there existed persistent and ultimately successful efforts to engage in 
both pursuits. Thus, there is a clear need to account for the nature of the 
traditionist Sufis’ cohort with greater specificity than has heretofore been 
achieved. The next section proposes network analysis as one method that can 
realise this ambition.

  
Early ‘Traditionist Sufis’  
[ 79
The Dynamics of Hadith Transmission: A Network Analysis
By studying the statistical properties of networks, researchers in numerous 
fields have gained significant insights into the structure and strategies of 
cooperative or competitive behaviour.79 In the field of Islamic studies, the 
methodological and analytical insights of network analysis remain mostly 
unrealised, apart from a small group of social historians.80 In relation to the 
study of hadith, the invocation a ‘network’ as a matrix of sustained relation-
ships functions mostly as an abstraction, and does not engage more technical 
literature on the subject.81 Here, the discussion will be limited to describing 
in formal terms the dynamics of the hadith-transmission network of the 
third–fourth/ninth–tenth centuries, and to observing evidence of traditionist 
Sufis’ development of their own hierarchical niche therein.82
Before elaborating the specifics of the historical hadith-transmission 
network, an explanation of some key concepts in the field of network studies 
will demonstrate their utility. Every network is composed of nodes and 
edges. In this case, the nodes are figures who transmitted hadith, the edges 
a record of the association of two figures in a teacher–student relationship. 
Because it is known in the case of hadith transmitters that influence is trans-
mitted through an edge – from a teacher (source) to a student (target) – it is 
possible to employ concepts that have been developed through the obser-
vation of ‘directional’ networks. Two interdependent measures that have 
proven useful in studying the properties of these networks are ‘prominence’ 
and ‘centrality’.83 Generally speaking, ‘prominence’ refers to the number 
of connections that obtain for a given node, which is often referred to as 
its ‘degree’. ‘Centrality’ can be defined in terms of a given node’s local or 
global density of connections to other nodes; for instance, a given node can 
be ‘central’ in relation to other nodes in its immediate vicinity (that is, other 
nodes with which it is directly connected by an edge), a situation expressed 
by the metric ‘harmonic closeness’. Separate metrics are used to deduce the 
influence a given node exerts over the structure of an entire network; these 
include ‘eigenvector’ and ‘betweenness’ centrality. Nodes that exhibit high 
levels of eigenvector or betweenness centrality thus strongly influence the 
development of a directed network.84 In the present study, these metrics 
will serve to illuminate the niche that traditionist Sufis occupied vis-à-vis 
contemporary ḥuffāẓ.
To date, Şentürk’s Narrative Social Structure represents the most extensive 
application of network theory to hadith transmission. The work is an attempt 
to use abstract models of social evolution with the aim of supplementing nar-
rative accounts of large-scale historical networks.85 Unfortunately, Şentürk at 
times contributes to the discussion through negative example, as in his treat-
ment of the earliest periods of hadith transmission.86 However, his analyses 
of other aspects of the network properties of ḥuffāẓ prove highly prescient 
of results obtained through more traditional modes of scholarship. This can 
be seen in his treatment of the concept of ‘geodesic distance’, a metric that 

 80 ] 
Jeremy Farrell
correlates strongly with ‘betweenness’, discussed above. In studying this 
network property, he aims to show that hadith specialists actively sought 
to minimise the geodesic distance between themselves and the Prophet 
Muḥammad by connecting themselves to highly prominent hadith transmit-
ters of earlier generations.87 With respect to this property, Şentürk has solidly 
quantified the existence of two distinct temporal phases of hadith transmis-
sion amongst ḥuffāẓ. In the first phase (c. 100–360/718–970), edge formation 
between a given ḥāfiẓ and his teachers and students occurred at a distance of 
two geodesic units (that is, teachers were, on average, from two ‘generations’ 
earlier, students from two later). The stability of this pattern eroded sharply 
beginning around 361/971, whereafter the geodesic distance of teacher and 
student interactions spanned only one generation.88 Şentürk infers that this 
apparent sea change in the pattern of the cooperative association of ḥuffāẓ 
is attributable to the canonisation of the Ṣaḥīḥayn and other Sunni hadith 
works. This conclusion, derived only from the analysis of documented edges 
between nodes in the hadith-transmission network of ḥuffāẓ, prefigures with 
extraordinary precision Brown’s timeline of the ‘intensive process of canoni-
zation’ to which these works were subjected.89
If Şentürk’s data concerning the macro-evolution of the élite stratum of the 
hadith-transmission network between the third/ninth and the fifth/eleventh 
century can be accepted as largely correct,90 then these data can be used as a 
basis for investigating the processes of hierarchical differentiation within this 
network, as well. This task involves selecting a cadre of ḥuffāẓ that represent 
the maximum level of activity in the hadith-transmission network, as well 
as identifying the patterns of association for other actors, such as traditionist 
Sufis. In order to delimit the number of ḥuffāẓ under consideration, the three 
most ‘central’ ḥuffāẓ of a given generation, as determined by Şentürk, are used 
to develop the network ‘skeleton’. Duncan J. Watts has demonstrated the 
utility of assigning a ‘substrate’ to this initial structure in order to establish 
a lower boundary for the analysis of patterns of association.91 In the present 
study, this substrate comprises the three leading ḥuffāẓ from the earliest 
stratum with which Ibn Masrūq did not establish a relationship as a student; 
the upper boundary of the network includes the students of the ‘second wave’ 
of traditionist Sufis, the generation of al-Sulamī and Abū Nuʿaym (Table 4.2).
From this nodal skeleton, additional nodes are added by compiling the 
node and edge lists of these figures’ ‘significant’ teachers and students 
as they are preserved in two works: al-Dhahabī’s Siyar aʿlām al-nubalāʾ 
and al-Khaṭīb’s Tārīkh Baghdād.92 Here, ‘significant’ indicates that a given 
node has at least two edges, with at least one other node. A node can 
thus be significant given the following minimum conditions: (1) node (x) 
is connected by an edge with at least two other nodes (y) and (z); or, (2) 
Siyar and Tārīkh Baghdād both record that node (x) was connected to node 
(y).93 The choice of Siyar and Tārīkh Baghdād to provide this data can be 
defended on the basis of two considerations. First, the more catholic scope 
of al-Dhahabī’s Siyar, compared with Tadhkirat al-ḥuffāẓ, offers a wider 

  
Early ‘Traditionist Sufis’  
[ 81
pool of data to describe the traditionist Sufis. Whereas only Ibn al-Aʿrābī 
merits a biographical notice in Tadhkirat al-ḥuffāẓ, all of the traditionist Sufis 
appear in Siyar. As for Tārīkh Baghdād, it serves, in some cases, as one of the 
first prosopographical works to preserve extensive records of traditionist 
Sufis’ contacts with hadith specialists. However, unlike in the Siyar, neither 
Ibn al-Aʿrābī nor Ibn Nujayd has a biographical notice in Tārīkh Baghdād. 
This mismatch of data introduces a bias in the resulting analysis towards 
Ibn Masrūq, al-Khuldī and al-Rūdhbārī, although this can be justified: if 
the Sufis tied strongly to Baghdad played as important a role in the devel-
opment of the movement as is commonly accepted, then capturing the 
clearest possible picture of the associations that traditionist Sufis formed in 
Baghdad should be prioritised.
There are 439 significant nodes in this model of the hadith-transmission 
network (c. 165–442/780–1050), and 1,336 directed edges between them.94 
Using the network analysis software Gephi, we compute the metrics of 
degree, and eigenvector, harmonic closeness, and betweenness centralities in 
order to provide a working basis to describe macro-trends of edge formation 
within this network (Table 4.3). The distributions for degree and eigenvector 
centrality are normal, meaning that they conform roughly to the ‘bell-shaped 
curve’. However, the distributions for harmonic closeness and betweenness 
centralities exhibit a pronounced right-tailed skew, indicating that these 
metrics identify only a small number of nodes with significant scores. For 
the model of the hadith-transmission network under consideration, a mere 
thirty-two nodes (7.3 per cent of total) exhibit non-trivial harmonic centrality, 
and twenty-nine nodes (6.6 per cent of total) exhibit non-trivial betweenness 
centrality.95 Because the properties of harmonic closeness and between-
ness exclude large parts of this representation of the hadith-transmission 
network, it can be said that this network exhibits a pronounced hierarchy. 
We turn now to an examination of the contributions of the hadith specialists 
and traditionist Sufis to this process of hierarchisation.
For every metric related to the ḥuffāẓ there is a clear and steep drop-off from 
the third/ninth to the fourth/tenth century, although an analysis of distinc-
tive subsets of ṭabaqah (X) shows that a high degree of variability in network 
metrics was possible even at the highest reaches of the hadith-transmission 
network (Table 4.4). The average degree roughly halves between ṭabaqah 
(IX) and the final ṭabaqah (XIV), members of which died in the fifth/eleventh 
century. The density of significant connections craters both in terms of local 
(harmonic) and global (eigenvector) centrality: the latter metric decreases by 
nearly 92 per cent from a zenith in the mid-third-/ninth-century ṭabaqah (IX) 
to the mid-fourth-/tenth-century ṭabaqah (XIII); the former metric drops by 
approximately one-third (~ 34 per cent) from ṭabaqahs (IX)–(XIII). Likewise, 
the drop in betweenness (~ 59 per cent) during this same stretch suggests 
that ḥuffāẓ who died in the second half of the fourth/tenth century were 
less effective catalysts for the influence of their teachers’ generations. The 
evidence of a significant shake-up of the the stratum of ḥuffāẓ in the hadith 

 82 ] 
Jeremy Farrell
transmission network is unmistakable. This feature of the ḥuffāẓ network 
may, in part, help to contextualise the decrease in geodesic distance through-
out the network that Şentürk has identified.
As for traditionist Sufis, the metrics for their activities can be characterised 
in relation to the ḥuffāẓ as both inferior and relatively stable with respect to 
the ḥuffāẓ. From the time of Ibn Masrūq to al-Rūdhbārī, there is either slight 
convergence in the metrics of degree or centrality relative to contemporary 
hadith specialists or none at all, with the obvious exception of Ibn al-Aʿrābī 
(Tables 4.5, 4.6). This finding suggests a further instance of hierarchisation 
between most of the traditionist Sufis and their hadith-specialist contem-
poraries. A similarly stable aspect of the traditions Sufi stratum of activity 
involves their role as teachers, particularly their ability to attract students 
who became ḥuffāẓ. According to previously outlined data, every traditions 
Sufi examined here proved to be a productive teacher who taught at least 
one ḥāfiẓ, and sometimes multiple ḥuffāẓ. This finding of consistent interac-
tions between the traditionist Sufi and ḥuffāẓ strata in the hadith transmission 
network suggests that  the ‘second wave’ of early traditionist Sufis repre-
sented by Ibn al-Aʿrābī, al-Khuldī, Ibn Nujayd, and al-Rūdhbārī reflect the 
dynamics of a particularly crucial phase of cooperation between hadith spe-
cialists and Sufis. A fuller treatment of the available data would determine 
the criteria by which to distinguish Ibn al-Aʿrābī from his fellow traditionist 
Sufis, but the success of al-Khuldī, Ibn Nujayd and al-Rūdhbārī in influenc-
ing the topmost stratum of hadith scholarship, without becoming themselves 
ḥuffāẓ, suggests the existence of distinctive hierarchical niche for these actors 
within the hadith-transmission network. The example of later traditionist 
Sufis like Ibn Khafīf, al-Sulamī and al-Qushayrī, underscores the resilience of 
this niche with the passage of time.
Conclusion
Despite precarious numbers, an early cohort of traditionist Sufis exhibited 
positive loyalties to both the hadith-specialist and Sufi communities during the 
latter half of the third/ninth and the entirety of the fourth/tenth centuries. As 
a Sufi, each was remembered as among the most impactful and well-respected 
figures of his era and locale by later Sufi historians. As participants in hadith 
transmission, traditionist Sufis enjoyed relationships with élite hadith special-
ists; this latter group at times praised the merits of the Sufis’ hadith scholar-
ship and also played a key role in the transmission of their minor hadith 
works. Network analysis of records of the patterns of association between 
ḥuffāẓ and traditionist Sufis confirms that most early traditionist Sufis can be 
distinguished hierarchically from contemporary ḥuffāẓ. Nevertheless, close 
analysis of these records also indicates traditionist Sufis effectively directed 
cooperation between the two movements. The success of traditionist Sufis 
in constructing a niche within the hadith-transmission network thereby pro-
vided a model that endured for centuries within the wider Sunni community.

  
Early ‘Traditionist Sufis’  
[ 83
Table 4.1 Concurrence between traditionist Sufi and proto-canonical hadith 
works*
Prophetic Reports
Companion Reports
Other
Author
‘Six Books’ ‘Adjustment’ None
Six Books
Adjustment
Ibn al-Aʿrābī**
 17
 2
 9
 4
 3
 80
Al-Khuldī (a)
  3
 2
 1
 3
 1
 40
Al-Khuldī (b)
 33
13
 4
 9
 8
 10
Ibn Nujayd
 33
 2
 8
10
 3
  7
Al-Rūdhbārī
 15
 1
 9
 9
 1
 18
Totals
101
20
31
35
20
155
* The works considered here are Ibn al-Aʿrābī, Kitāb al-Zuhd (ed. al-Sayyid); al-Khuldī (a), 
Fawāʾid, and (b), Majālis; Ibn Nujayd, Juzʾ (ed. Orfali and Böwering); Rūdhbārī, Majālis. These 
counts are taken from the editors’ notes and takhrīj. Note that Radtke erroneously describes 
four reports as missing in the proto-canon (Radtke, Materialien, D, XII [found in Ibn Khuzayma, 
Ṣaḥīḥ]), or six books (Radtke, Materialien, D, XXXII, XXIII, XXXVI [found in Ibn Mājah, Sunan]).
** Note that there are twenty-two repetitions of reports in Kitāb al-Zuhd.
Table 4.2 Most ‘central’ ḥuffāẓ by ṭabaqah,* arranged chronologically
Generation
‘Central’ Figures
VII
ʿAbd Allāh ibn al-Mubārak (d. 181/797); Yaḥyá ibn Saʿīd al-Qaṭṭān 
(d. 198/813); Sufyān ibn ʿUyaynah (d. 198/814)
VIII
Abū Dāwūd al-Ṭayālisī (d. 204/819?); Abū Nuʿaym al-Faḍl ibn 
Dukayn (d. 219/834); Abū Zakarīyāʾ al-Naysābūrī (d. 226/840)
IX
Yaḥyá ibn Maʿīn (d. 233/848); Isḥāq ibn Rāhawayh (d. 238/853); 
Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal (d. 241/855)
X**
(a) Muḥammad ibn Ismāʿīl al-Bukhārī (d. 256/870); Muslim ibn 
al-Ḥajjāj (d. 261/875); Abū Zurʿah al-Rāzī (d. 264/880)  
(b) Abū ʿAbd Allāh Muḥammad ibn Yaḥyá al-Dhuhlī (d. 258/872); 
Abū Ḥātim al-Rāzī (d. 277/890); Abū Dāwūd al-Sijistānī (d. 275/889)
XI
Muḥammad Ibn Mājah (d. 273/887); Aḥmad ibn Shuʿayb al-Nasāʾī 
(d. 303/915); Abū Bakr Muḥammad ibn Isḥāq ibn Khuzaymah 
(d. 311/924)
XII
Abū Ḥāmid Ibn al-Sharqī (d. 325/937); Abū Bakr Muḥammad ibn 
ʿAbd Allāh al-Ṣayrafī al-Shāfiʿī (d. 330/942); al-Qāḍī al-Maḥāmilī 
(d. 330/942)
XIII
Abū ʿAlī al-Naysābūrī (d. 349/960); Abū al-Qāsim Sulaymān 
al-Ṭabarānī (d. 360/971); ʿAlī al-Dāraquṭnī (d. 385/995)
XIV
Abū ʿAbd Allāh Muḥammad Ibn Mandah (d. 395/1005); al-Ḥākim 
al-Naysābūrī (d. 405/1014); Abū Nuʿaym al-Iṣfahānī (d. 430/1038)
* Şentürk, Narrative Social Structure, 222–3.
** Figures from (a) are taken from Şentürk’s list. The first two figures from (b) are taken from 
Brown’s discussion (Canonization, 86–90) of the pushback against the Ṣaḥīḥayn; additionally, Abū 
Dāwūd is included as a control for a ḥāfiẓ strongly connected to a traditionist Sufi (Ibn al-Aʿrābī).

 84 ] 
Jeremy Farrell
Table 4.3 Mean metrics of prominence and centrality among ḥuffāẓ
Generation
Death Date Range
Degree
Eigenvector 
Centrality
Harmonic 
Closeness 
Centrality
Betweenness 
Centrality*
VII
181–98/797–814
161.6
0.289
0.409
N/A**
VIII
204–26/819–40
143.3
0.116†
0.421
0.00072
IX
223–41/847–55
198.3
0.474
0.519
0.00780
X (a)
256–64/870–7
165.6
0406
0.498
0.00645
X (b)
258–75/871–89
120
0.335
0.437
0.00281
XI
273–311/887–924‡
 79.6
0.160
0.417
0.00428
XII
328–54/940–64
 82
0.124
0.378
0.00401
XIII
349–85/960–95
 56.3
0.039
0.342
0.00325
XIV
405–430/1005–38
 95.3
0.032
0.400
N/A
* The range for recorded degrees of betweenness centrality is 0.359 (al-Rūdhbārī) to 285.777 
(Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal).
** In the case of both (VII) and (XIV), the betweenness centrality measure is incomplete, as it 
does not account for the connections, respectively, to teachers and students, and markedly 
skews the impression of the importance of these generations. Eigenvector and harmonic 
closeness centrality measures, are, however, useful for context, as will be argued.
† The relatively low degree of betweenness in ṭabaqah (VIII) can be attributed to the fact that 
figures in this ṭabaqah were sometimes taught by those who preceded even ṭabaqah (VII); 
therefore, this latter group is not well-represented in the dataset, and many of the nodes did 
not form ‘significant’ connections, as described above.
‡ Neither the eigenvector nor betweenness centrality metrics for XI includes Ibn Mājah because 
he evinces the lowest possible score of 0 based on the data compiled here. This is because 
all his teachers were connected only to him, and therefore considered not ‘significant’ by 
the criteria given above. The inverse principle holds for his score in the metric of harmonic 
centrality, in which he evinces the highest possible score of 1. The measure of his degree and 
eigenvector centrality is therefore also based uniquely on connections to his students.
 
Table 4.4 Variability in prominence and centrality in ṭabaqah (X)
Generation
Figures
Degree
Harmonic 
Closeness 
Centrality
Eigenvector 
Centrality
Betweenness 
Centrality
X (a)
al-Bukhārī
158
0.508
0.453
0.01034
Muslim
258
0.532
0.414
0.00795
Abū Zurʿah al-Rāzī
 81
0.455
0.351
0.00106
X (b)
Abū ʿAbd Allāh 
 al-Dhuhlī
 95
0.404
0.304
0.00129
Abū Ḥātim al-Rāzī
116
0.445
0.369
0.00288
Abū Dāwūd  
 al-Sijistānī
149
0.460
0.333
0.00426

  
Early ‘Traditionist Sufis’  
[ 85
Table 4.5 Comparison of traditionist Sufis with contemporary ḥuffāẓ 
(fl. third/ninth century)
Figures
Metrics with Normal 
Distribution*
Metrics with Right-skewed 
Distribution**
Degree
Eigenvector 
Centrality
Harmonic 
Closeness 
Centrality
Betweenness 
Centrality
X–XI
117.2 (± 21.7)
0.282 (± 0.048)
72%
89.6%
Ibn Masrūq
 32 (–4.1)
0.095 (–3.9)
53.1% (–19.9%)
75.9% (–13.7%)
* Measures for ḥuffāẓ ṭabaqahs are given as ‘mean (standard error of the mean)’. Raw values for 
traditionist Sufis are followed by the ‘z-score’ in parentheses. The latter describes the distance 
from the raw score from units of standard error of the mean. A score of –1 thus indicates the 
figure is one standard error below average, –2 indicates two standard errors below average, 
and so on.
** Given the low number of nodes which evince non-trivial measures of these metrics (29, and 
32, respectively), scores for both ḥuffāẓ and traditionist Sufis given as percentile, calculated 
according to the normal cumulative distribution function, given that no attempt was made 
here to fit the data to a model; the disparity between the traditionist Sufis percentile and that 
of the mean of the contemporary ṭabaqah is given in parentheses. A measure of 90% is a value 
above which 10% of the observations may be found.
 
Table 4.6 Comparison of traditionist Sufis with contemporary ḥuffāẓ 
(fl. fourth/tenth century)
Figures
Metrics with Normal 
Distribution
Metrics with Right-skewed 
Distribution
Degree
Eigenvector 
Centrality
Harmonic 
Closeness 
Centrality
Betweenness 
Centrality
XII–XIII
70.9 (± 11.1)
0.076 (± 0.018) 
28.1%
65.6%
Ibn al-Aʿrābī
42 (–2.5)
0.061 (–0.8)
96.9% (+68.8%)
41.4% (–24.2%)
Al-Khuldī
59 (–1.6)
0.019 (–3.1)
21.9% (–6.2%)
48.3% (–17.3%)
Ibn Nujayd
30 (–3.6)
0.002 (–4.1)
 3.1% (–25.0%)
 0.0% (N/A)
al-Rūdhbārī
23 (–4.2)
0.023 (–2.9)
12.5% (–15.6%)
13.8% (–51.8%)
Notes
 1. Roy P. Mottahedeh, Loyalty and Leadership in an Early Islamic Society, 2nd edn 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2001). Compare with Hugh Kennedy, 
‘The Late ʿAbbāsid Pattern’, in Chase F. Robinson (ed.), The New Cambridge 
History of Islam, vol. 1: The Formation of the Islamic World, Sixth to Eleventh Centuries 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010), 360–93; Maaiike van Berkel, 
Nadia El-Cheikh, Hugh Kennedy and Letizia Osti (eds), Crisis and Continuity 

 86 ] 
Jeremy Farrell
at the Abbasid Court: Formal and Informal Politics in the Caliphate of Muqtadir (295–
320/908–32), Islamic History and Civilization, Studies and Texts, 102 (Leiden: 
Brill, 2013); and esp. Jonathan A. C. Brown, ‘[Revised] A Man for All Seasons: Ibn 
ʿUqdah and Crossing Sectarian Boundaries in the 4th/10th Century’, Al-ʿUṣūr 
al-Wusṭā 24 ([2008] 2016): 139–44.
 2. Mottahedeh, Loyalty and Leadership, 4. The nature of ‘positive loyalties’, as 
expressed in oaths and vows, is discussed at ibid., 40–1.
 3. Marshall G. S. Hodgson, The Venture of Islam, 3 vols (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1974), 1:408. Hodgson relies extensively on the first editions of 
two works by  Louis Massignon, Passion d’al-Hosayn-Ibn-Mansûr al-Hallâj: martyr 
mystique de l’Islam, exécuté à Bagdad le 26 Mars 922. Étude d’histoire religieuse, 4 vols, 
2nd edn (Paris: Paul Geuthner, [1922] 1975), translated as The Passion of al-Ḥallāj: 
Mystic and Martyr of Islam, trans. Herbert Mason, 4 vols (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1982), 1 (subsequently cited as Passion, according to the [1975]/
[1982] editions); and Louis Massignon, Essai sur les origines du lexique technique de 
la mystique musulamane, 2nd edn (Paris: J. Vrin, [1922] 1954), 300–1, translated as 
Essay on the Origins of the Technical Language of Islamic Mysticism, trans. Benjamin 
Clark (Notre Dame, IN: Notre Dame University Press, 1997), 203–4 (subse-
quently cited as Essay, according to the [1954]/[1997] editions). Compare with J. 
Spenser Trimingham, The Sufi Orders in Islam (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1971); Eric S. Ohlander, Sufism in an Age of Transition: ʿUmar al-Suhrawardī and the 
Rise of the Islamic Mystical Brotherhoods, Islamic History and Civilization, Studies 
and Texts, 71 (Leiden: Brill, 2006).
 4. For the development of the hadith specialisation across the third/ninth and 
fourth/tenth centuries, see G. H. A. Juynboll, Muslim Tradition (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1981), 161–217; Eerik Dickinson, The Development 
of Early Sunnite Ḥadīth Criticism. The Taqdima of Ibn Abī Ḥātim al-Rāzī 
(240–854/327–938), Islamic History and Civilization, Studies and Texts, 38 
(Leiden: Brill, 2001); Christopher Melchert, ‘The Piety of the Hadith Folk’, 
International Journal of Middle East Studies 34 (2002): 425–39; Scott C. Lucas, 
Constructive Critics, Ḥadīth Literature, and the Articulation of Sunnī Islam: the 
Legacy of the Generation of Ibn Saʿd, Ibn Maʿīn, and Ibn Ḥanbal, Islamic History 
and Civilization, Studies and Texts, 51 (Leiden: Brill, 2004); Jonathan A. C. 
Brown, The Canonization of al-Bukhārī and Muslim: the Formation and Function of 
the Sunnī Ḥadīth Canon, Islam (sic) History and Civilization, Studies and Texts, 
69 (Leiden: Brill, 2007), 47–208. For Sufism during this period, see, in addi-
tion to n. 3 above, ʿUmar al-Farrūkh, al-Taṣawwuf fī al-Islām (Beirut: Maktabat 
al-Munayminah, 1366/1948), 56–71; Paul Nwyia, Éxegèse coranique et langage 
mystique: Nouvel essai sur le lexique technique des mystiques musulmanes, Série 1: 
Pensée Arabe et Musulmane 49 (Beirut: Dar El-Machreq, 1970); Christopher 
Melchert, ‘The Transition from Asceticism to Mysticism at the Middle of the 
Ninth Century C.E.’, Studia Islamica 83 (1996): 51–70; Bernd Radtke, ‘Taṣawwuf: 
Early Development in the Arabic and Persian Lands’, in Encyclopaedia of Islam, 
2nd edn, eds Peri Bearman, Thierry Bianquis, C. E. Bosworth and Wolfhart P. 
Heinrichs (Brill Online; subsequently cited as EI2); Gerhard Böwering, ‘Early 

  
Early ‘Traditionist Sufis’  
[ 87
Sufism Between Persecution and Heresy’, in Frederik de Jong and Bernd Radtke 
(eds), Islamic Mysticism Contested: Thirteen Centuries of Controversies and Polemics, 
Islamic History and Civilization, Studies and Texts, 29 (Leiden: Brill, 1999), 1–21; 
Josef van Ess, ‘Sufism and Its Opponents: Reflections on topoi, Tribulations and 
Transformations’, in Frederik de Jong and Bernd Radtke (eds), Islamic Mysticism 
Contested (Leiden: Brill, 1999), 22–44; Alexander Knysh, Islamic Mysticism: A 
Short History, 2nd edn (Leiden: Brill, 2010), 43–67; Christopher Melchert ‘Baṣran 
Origins of Classical Sufism’, Der Islam 83 (2005): 21–40; Ahmet T. Karamustafa, 
Sufism: the Formative Period, New Edinburgh Islamic Surveys (Edinburgh: 
Edinburgh University Press, 2007), 1–37. Laury Silvers, A Soaring Minaret: Abu 
Bakr al-Wasiti and the Rise of Baghdadi Sufism (Albany, NY: State University of 
New York Press, 2012, 17–34, 45–60, argues for continuity between hadith spe-
cialists and Sufis without directly addressing previous scholarship. Some schol-
arship connects third-/ninth-century currents directly to developments in the 
second/eighth century; e.g., Annemarie Schimmel, Mystical Dimensions of Islam 
(Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 1975), 42–80; Richard 
Gramlich, Alte Vorbilder des Sufitums, Akademie der Wissenschaften und der 
Literature Mainz Veröffentlichungen der Orientalischen Kommission 42, 1–2 
(Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1995–6).
 5. Melchert, ‘Piety of the Hadith Folk’, 412–13.
 6. Melchert, ‘Piety of the Hadith Folk’, 411.
 7. Melchert, ‘Piety of the Hadith Folk’, 411–12.
 8. Melchert, ‘Transition’, 53; Melchert, ‘Early Renunciants’, 408.
 9. Brown, Canonization, 99–135.
10. Karamustafa, Sufism, 59–60.
11. For manuscript and biographical references, see Fuat Sezgin, Geschichte des ara-
bischen Schrifttums, 10 vols + indices (Leiden: Brill, 1967–2007), (a) 1:660, No. 29 
(Ibn al-Aʿrābī); (b) 1:661, No. 30 (al-Khuldī); (c) 1:662, No. 34 (Ibn Nujayd); (d) 
1:663, No. 36 (al-Rūdhbārī; Sezgin incorrectly gives his kunyah as ‘Abū ʿAlī’). Ibn 
Masrūq does not appear in this work.
12. Al-Khaṭīb al-Baghāddī, Tārīkh madīnat al-salām (= Tārīkh Baghdād), ed. Bashshār 
ʿAwwād Maʿrūf, 17 vols (Beirut: Dār al-Gharb al-Islāmī, 1422/2002), 6:279–84, 
No. 2772 (subsequently cited as TB). Al-Dhahabī also records the variant dates 
given: Aḥmad al-Dhahabī, Siyar aʿlām al-nubalāʾ, ed. Shuʿayb al-Arnaʾūṭ et al., 
25 vols (Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Risālah, 1401–9/1981–8), 13:494–5 (subsequently 
cited as SAN); compare with al-Dhahabī, Taʾrīkh al-islām wa-wafayāt al-mashāhīr 
wa-l-aʿlām, ed. Bashshār ʿAwwād Maʿrūf, 19 vols (Beirut: Dār al-Gharb al-Islāmī, 
1408/1988), 6:896, No. 69, sub annos ah 291–300 (subsequently cited as TI), where 
he also records both dates. Further prosopographical treatment appears in Bernd 
Radtke (ed.), Materialien zur alten islamischen Frömmigkeit, Basic Texts of Islamic 
Mysticism, 2 (Leiden: Brill, 2009), xv–vi.
13. Abū ʿAbd al-Raḥmān al-Sulamī, Ṭabaqāt al-ṣūfīyah, ed. Nūr al-Dīn Shuraybah 
(Cairo: Jāmiʿat al-Azhar, 1953, rep. 1407/1987), 237–41 = Kitab ṭabaqāt al-ṣūfīyah, 
ed. Johannes Pedersen (Leiden: Brill, 1960), 448–52; subsequently cited as ṬṢ, 
according to the [1953]/[1960] editions. Abū Nuʿaym Iṣfahānī, Ḥilyat al-awliyāʾ 

 88 ] 
Jeremy Farrell
wa-ṭabaqāt al-aṣfiyāʾ, 10 vols (Cairo: Maṭbaʿat al-Saʿādah,, 1352–7/1932–8, repr. 
Beirut: Dār al-Fikr, 1400/1980), 10:213–16, No. 548; subsequently cited as ḤA, all 
citations referring to the tenth volume.
14. ḤA, 214.1–3; TB 6:282. Modern scholarship portrays abdāl as a subclass of the 
awliyāʾ. For studies of the various usage of these terms, see Hussein La-Shayʾ 
and Farzin Negahban, ‘Abdāl’, in Encyclopaedia Islamica, eds Farhad Daftary and 
Wilferd Madelung (Brill Online); Jacqueline Chabbi, ‘Abdāl’, in Encyclopedia 
Iranica, ed Ehsan Yarshater (1985), 1/2:173–4 (henceforth cited as EIr); Rebecca 
Masterton ‘A Comparative Exploration of the Spiritual Authority of the Awliyāʾ 
in the Shiʿi and Sufi Traditions’, American Journal of Islamic Social Sciences 32(1) 
(2015): 49–74; and Rana Mikati, ‘On the Identity of the Syrian abdāl’, Bulletin of the 
School of Oriental and African Studies (BSOAS) 80/1 (2017): 21–43. I am indebted to 
Christopher Melchert for alerting me to this last reference.
15. Ḥamzah ibn Yūsuf al-Sahmī, Suʾālāt Ḥamzah ibn Yūsuf al-Sahmī lil-Dāraquṭnī wa-
ghayrihi min al-mashāyikh fī al-jarḥ wa-al-taʿdīl, ed. Muwaffaq ibn ʿAbd Allāh ibn 
ʿAbd al-Qādir (Riyadh: Maktabat al-ʿĀrif, 1404/1984), 158, No. 165; TB 6:283; Ibn 
Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī, Lisān al-Mīzān, 7 vols (Hyderabad: Majlis Dāʾirat al-Maʿārif, 
1329–31; repr. Dār al-Maʿārif al-Niẓāmīyah, 1390/1971), 1:292, No. 866 = ed. 
ʿAbd al-Fattāḥ Abū Ghuddah, 9 vols + index (Beirut: Maktabat al-Maṭbūʿāt 
al-Islāmīyah, 1423/2003), 1:646, No. 803 (subsequently cited as LM, according to 
the [1971]/[2002] editions).
16. In TB (6:279), the first quotation for Ibn Masrūq, through al-Khuldī, is a 
love poem. Al-Sulamī quotes Ibn Masrūq as approving the practice of samāʿ 
al-rubāʿīyāt (ṬṢ 239/234–5), which fits Melchert’s conception of a ‘mystic’ in 
‘Baṣran Origins’, 248. Compare with Tilman Seidensticker, ‘An Arabic Origin of 
the Persian Rubāʿī?’ Middle Eastern Literatures 14(2) (2011): 155–69, here 162; and 
Willem Stoetzer, ‘Rubāʿī’, EI2. On love poetry in the third/ninth and fourth/tenth 
centuries, generally, see Thomas Bauer, Liebe und Liebesdichtung in der Arabischen 
Welt des 9. und 10. Jahrhunderst: eine literatur- und mentalitätgeschichtliche Studie des 
arabischen Ġazal, Diskurse der Arabistik, 2 (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1998).
17. Al-Dhahabī notes the title in SAN (‘samiʿnā al-Qanāʿah min taʾlīfih’) and TI 
53:244, sub anno 722, where he records that Ibn Rawāḥah (d. 722/1322) received 
the work through a licence (ijāzah). The title was also known to Abū ʿUbayd 
Allāh al-Rūdānī (d. 1094/1682–3) as in his Ṣilat al-khalaf bi-mawṣūl al-salaf, 
ed. Muḥammad Ḥajjī (Beirut: Dār al-Gharb al-Islāmī, 1408/1988), 336, and 
Muḥammad ibn Jaʿfar al-Kattānī (ex. 1345/1927), al-Risālah al-mustaṭrafah 
li-bayān mashhūr kutub al-sunnah al-musharrafah (Cairo: Maktabat al-Kulliyāt 
al-Azharīyah and Beirut: M. A. Kharmā, 1913), 67. Compare with Stefan 
Weninger, Qanāʿa (Genügsamkeit) in der arabischen Literatur: anhand des Kitāb 
al-Qanāʿa wa-t-taʿaffuf von Ibn Abī d-Dunyā, Islamkundliche Untersuchungen 
154 (Berlin: Klaus Schwarz, 1992), 200–1; apud Radtke, Materialien,  
xvi.
18. Ṣalāḥ al-Dīn al-ʿAlāʾī, Ithārat al-fawāʾid al-majmūʿah fī al-ishārah ilá al-farāʾid 
al-mawsūʿah, ed. Muḥammad ibn Ḥayyās Āl Marzūq al-Zahrānī (Medina: 
Maktabat al-ʿUlūm wa-al-Ḥikam), 1425/2004), 307–8.

  
Early ‘Traditionist Sufis’  
[ 89
19. ṬṢ, 428–30/443–8; ḤA, 375–6, No. 655; SAN 15:407–11; TI 25:184–6, sub anno ah 
340; LM 1:308–9, No. 927/1:670–1, No. 758. For his time in Damascus, see Ibn 
ʿAsākir, Tārīkh Dimashq, ed. ʿUmar ibn Gharāmah al-ʿAmrawī, 80 vols (Beirut: 
Dār al-Fikr, 1415/1995), 5:553–7, No. 144. Al-Dhahabī confers the honorific 
‘shaykh al-ḥaram’ on several other notable hadith specialists, including Ibn al-
Mundhir al-Naysābūrī (d. 318/930), as discussed in Gavin N. Picken, ‘A Scholar 
of the Holy Precincts: the Life, Works, and Methodology of Ibn al-Mundhir 
al-Nīsābūrī’, Oriens 38 (2010): 185–215, here 191, n. 27; and Rāḍī al-Dīn Ibrāhīm 
ibn Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm ibn Abī Bakr al-Ṭabarī al-Shāfiʿī (d. 722/1322), as 
discussed in Sufi Inquiries and Interpretations of Abū ʿAbd al-Raḥmān al-Sulamī (d. 
412/1021) and a Treatise of Traditions by Ismāʿīl b. Nujayd al-Naysābūrī (d. 366/976-
7), ed. Bilal Orfali and Gerhard Böwering (Beirut: Dar El-Machreq, 2010), 21 
(Introduction). Picken translates the phrase as ‘the scholar of the Holy Precincts’; 
Orfali and Böwering do not translate it.
20. Alexander Knysh, ‘Abū Saʿīd Ibn al-Aʿrābī’, in Encyclopaedia of Islam, 3rd edn, eds 
Kate Fleet, Gudrun Krämer, Denis Matrinage, John Nawas and Everett Rowson 
(Brill Online; subsequently cited as EI3). Compare with his comments in Islamic 
Mysticism, 95–7.
21. Ibn Khayr al-Ishbīlī, Fahrasat Ibn Khayr al-Ishbīlī, ed. Muḥammad Fuʾād Manṣūr 
(Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 1998), 251, Nos 627–34 = ed. Bashshār ʿAwwād 
Maʿrūf and Muḥammad Bashshār ʿAwwād (Tunis: Dār al-Gharb al-Islāmī, 
2009), 454, Nos 644–51. See also the references in Manuela Marin, ‘Abû Saʿîd 
Ibn al-Aʿrâbî et le développement du soufisme en al-Andalus’, Revue du monde 
musulman et de la Méditerranée 63/4 (1992): 28–38; Nada Saab, ‘Ṣūfī Theory and 
Language in the Writings of Abū Saʿīd Aḥmad ibn ʿĪsā al-Kharrāz (d. 286/899)’, 
PhD dissertation, Yale University, 2004, 72–5.
22. For Ibn al-Aʿrābī’s role in the transmission of Abū Dāwūd’s works, see James 
Robson, ‘The Transmission of Abū Dāwūd’s “Sunan”’, BSOAS 14/3 (1952): 
579–88, esp. 582–3; and Christopher Melchert, ‘The Life and Works of Abū 
Dāwūd al-Sijistānī’, al-Qanṭara 29/1 (2008): 9–44, esp. 22–34 (al-Sunan) and 18, n. 
52, 36–8 (al-Zuhd).
23. SAN 15:407.
24. Al-Daraquṭnī, who transmits the judgement, apparently concurred: see 
Nāyif ibn Ṣalāḥ ibn ʿAlī al-Manṣūrī, al-Dalīl al-mughnī li-shuyūkh al-imām Abī 
al-Ḥasan al-Dāraquṭnī, with assistance from Abū al-Ḥasan Muṣtafá ibn Ismāʿīl 
al-Sulaymānī, Saʿd ibn ʿAbd Allāh al-Ḥamīd and Ḥasan Maqbūlī al-Ahdal 
(Riyadh: Dār al-Kiyān, 1428/2007), 124, No. 88.
25. Al-Dhahabī, Tadhkirat al-ḥuffāẓ, reprint (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 
[1375/1953] 2002), 3:47–8 [852], No. 830.
26. Ibn al-Aʿrābī, Muʿjam Ibn al-Aʿrābī, ed. ʿAbd al-Muḥsin ibn Ibrāhīm ibn Aḥmad 
al-Ḥusaynī, 3 vols in 1 (Riyadh: Dār Ibn al-Jawzī, 1418/1997) = Kitāb al-Muʿjam, 
ed. Muḥammad Ḥasan Maḥmūd Ḥasan Ismāʿīl and Misʿar ʿAbd al-Ḥamīd 
al-Saʿdanī (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 1424/2003). Another work contains 
traditions of affectionate touching: Ibn al-Aʿrābī, al-Qubal wa-al-muʿānaqah wa-al-
muṣāfaḥah, ed. Majdī Fatḥī al-Sayyid (Cairo: Maktabat al-Qurʾān, 1407/1987) = 

 90 ] 
Jeremy Farrell
ed. ʿAmr ʿAbd al-Munʿim Sulaym (Cairo: Maktabat Ibn Taymīyah and Jeddah: 
Maktabat al-ʿIlm, 1416/1996).
27. For the manuscript, see Sezgin, as cited above, n. 11(a). Melchert (‘Life and 
Works’, 36) notes, following Robson, that other, longer, versions were known 
to Ibn Khayr al-Ishbīlī and Ibn Ḥajar; furthermore, he observes that, ‘there is 
no account of [the manuscript’s] transmission from Abū Dāwūd through Ibn 
al-Aʿrābī’. One edition of Kitāb al-Zuhd suggests several possible transmission 
pathways from Abū Dāwūd through Ibn al-Aʿrābī. These are based on a small 
number of citations of accounts found in both Abū Dāwūd’s Kitāb al-Zuhd and 
the works of Abū Sulaymān al-Khaṭṭābī (d. 388/998), Aḥmad ibn al-Ḥusayn 
al-Bayhaqī (d. 458/1066), and al-Dhahabī: Abū Dāwūd al-Sijistānī, Kitāb al-Zuhd 
riwāyat Ibn al-Aʿrābī ʿanhu, ed. Abū Tamīm Yāsir ibn ibn Muḥammad and Abū 
Bilāl Ghunaym ibn ʿAbbās ibn Ghunaym (Ḥulwān: Dār al-Mishkāh, 1414/1993), 
20–1.
28. This title is likewise published in two editions: Ibn al-Aʿrābī, al-Zuhd wa-ṣifat 
al-zāhidīn, ed. Majdī Fatḥī al-Sayyid Ibrāhīm (Ṭanṭā: Dār al-Ṣaḥābah lil-Turāth, 
1408/1988) = Kitāb fīhi maʿnā al-zuhd wa-al-maqālāt wa-ṣifat al-zāhidīn, ed. 
Khadīja Muḥammad Kāmil and ʿĀmir al-Najjār (Cairo: Maṭbaʿat Dār al- Kutub 
al-Miṣrīyah, 1998).
29. ṬṢ, 434–9/454–61; ḤA, 381–2, No. 663; TB 8:145–52, No. 3668 (for the ḥajj 
account); SAN 15:558–60; TI 25:396–7, sub anno ah 348.
30. Ibn al-Nadīm, al-Fihrist lil-Nadīm, ed. Ayman Fuʾād Sayyid, 2 vols + Index, 2nd edn 
(London: Al-Furqan Islamic Heritage Foundation, 1430/2009), 1:655–66 (maqālah 
5, fann 5). Jawid Mojaddedi, The Biographical Tradition in Sufism: the ṭabaqāt Genre 
from al-Sulamī to Jāmī (Richmond: RoutledgeCurzon, 2001), 54–7, contends that 
Abū Nuʿaym’s references to al-Khuldī’s kitāb do not indicate a ‘book’, but does 
not refer to al-Fihrist. Compare with the counter-arguments of Rkia L. Cornell 
in al-Sulamī, Early Sufi Women: Dhikr al-niswah al-ṣūfīyāt al-mutaʿabbidāt, ed. 
and trans. Rkia L. Cornell (Louisville: Fons Vitae, 1999), 53, n. 133, and Devin J. 
Stewart, ‘The Structure of the Fihrist: Ibn al-Nadīm as a Historian of Islamic Law 
and Theology’, International Journal of Middle East Studies 39 (2007): 369–87, here 
380–2. I hope to settle the issue definitively in a separate study.
31. ṬṢ, 434/454. For the relationship with al-Junayd, see the brief comments in 
Massignon, Essay, 304, n. 2/206, n. 351; Knysh, Islamic Mysticism, 25. For his asso-
ciation with Ibn Masrūq, see below, n. 73.
32. Al-Dhahabī, Tadhkirat al-ḥuffāẓ 3:297 [1092], No. 933.
33. ʿAlī al-Dāraquṭnī, Sunan al-Dāraquṭnī wa-yalīhi al-Taʿlīq al-mughnī ʿalá al-Dāraqṭunī, 
ed. Shuʿayb Arnaʾūṭ, ʿAbd al-Munʿim al-Shalabī and Muḥammad Shams al-Ḥaqq 
ʿAẓīmābādī, 6 vols (Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Risālah, 1425/2004), 5:379, No. 4486. 
Compare with Muqbal ibn Hādī al-Wādiʿī, Tarājim rijāl al-Dāraquṭnī fī Sunanihi 
alladhīna lam yutarjam lahum fī al-Taqrīb wa-lā fī Rijāl al-Ḥākim (Ṣanʿāʾ: Dār 
al-Āthār, 1420/1999), 172, No. 398.
34. For al-Dāraquṭnī, see above, n. 33, and Manṣūrī, Dalīl, 162, No. 142. For al-Ḥākim, 
see Nāyif ibn Ṣalāḥ ibn ʿAlī al-Manṣūrī, al-Rawḍ al-bāsim fī tarājim shuyūkh 
al-Ḥākim, with assistance from Abū al-Ḥasan Muṣtafá ibn Ismāʿīl al-Sulaymānī, 

  
Early ‘Traditionist Sufis’  
[ 91
Saʿd ibn ʿAbd Allāh al-Ḥamīd and Ḥasan Maqbūlī al-Ahdal, 2 vols (Riyadh: Dār 
al-ʿĀṣimah, 1432/2011), 1:387, No. 259. For al-Baghdādī, see TB 8:145, repeated 
in SAN 15:559.
35. Nabīl Saʿd al-Dīn Jarrār (ed.), Majmūʿ fīhi ʿasharat ajzāʾ ḥadīthīyah (Beirut: Dār 
al-Bashāʾir al-Islāmīyah, 2001), 203–12, 213–21, 274–81, 294–301. Note that the 
Index (ibid., 524) indicates only the first two sessions.
36. Al-Khuldī, al-Fawāʾid wa-al-zuhd wa-al-raqāʾiq wa-al-marāthī, ed. Majdī Fatḥī al-
Sayyid (Ṭanṭā: Dār al-Ṣaḥābah lil-Turāth, 1989), 52.
37. SAN 15:559.
38. Ibn al-Jawzī, al-Muntaẓam fī tārīkh al-rusul wa-al-umam, 12 vols (Hyderabad: Dār 
al-Maʿārif al-ʿUthmānīyah, 1358/1939), 7:84.
39. ṬṢ 454–8/476–80; SAN 16:146–8; TI 26:335–6 sub anno ah 366. The most com-
prehensive study of al-Sulamī is now Jean-Jacques Thibon, L’Œuvre d’Abū 
ʿAbd al-Raḥmān al-Sulamī 325/937–412/1021 et la formation du soufisme (Beirut 
and Damascus: Presses d’IFPO, 2009). For relations between al-Sulamī and Ibn 
Nujayd, see Thibon, L’Œuvre, 609 (Index), s.v., ‘Ismāʿīl b. Nuǧayd’.
40. For further discussion of these contacts, see Najib Mayel Heravi and Daryoush 
Mohammed Poor, ‘Abū ʿAmr Ibn Nujayd’, Encyclopedia Islamica (Brill Online).
41. Al-Manṣūrī, Rawḍ 1:372, No. 248.
42. SAN 16:146; apud Ibn Nujayd, Sufi Inquiries, 22 n. 53 (Introduction).
43. Ibn Nujayd, Juzʾ fīhi min aḥādīth Abī ʿAmr Ismāʿīl ibn Nujayd ibn Aḥmad ibn Yūsuf 
al-Sulamī, in al-Fawāʾid taʾlīf ʿAbd al-Wahhāb ibn Muḥammad ibn Isḥāq ibn Yaḥyá ibn 
Mandah al-ʿAbdī al-Iṣfahānī, ed. Khalaf Maḥmūd ʿAbd al-Samīʿ, 2 vols (Beirut: Dār 
al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 1423/2002), 319–39 = Bilal Orfali and Gerhard Böwering 
(eds), Sufi Inquiries (Beirut: Dar El-Machreq, 2010), 83–92.
44. ṬṢ, 497–500/527–32; TB 6:552, No. 2431; SAN 16:227–8; TI 26:410–11, sub anno ah 
369. Nicholson erroneously contends he died at Ṣūr in Abū Naṣr al-Sarrāj al-Ṭūsī, 
The Kitáb al-Lumaʿ fi ʾl-taṣawwuf, ed. R. A. Nicholson, E. J. W. Gibb Memorial 
series, 22 (Leiden and London: Brill and Luzac, 1914), xviii; compare the treat-
ment, based on late evidence, in Daphna Ephrat, Spiritual Wayfarers, Leaders 
in Piety, Harvard Middle Eastern Monographs, 40 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 2008), 221 (Index), s.v., ‘al-Rūdhbārī, Aḥmad b. ʿAṭāʾ’.
45. For the quotation, see ṬṢ, 497/527. On Abū ʿAlī, see ṬṢ, 354–60/362–9; ḤA, 356–7, 
No. 638. Elsewhere (Early Sufi Women, 241), al-Sulamī quotes al-Rūdhbārī’s 
maternal aunt, Abū ʿAlī’s sister, saying that her nephew was not a real Sufi while 
her brother was; apud Arin Shawkat Salamah-Qudsi, ‘A Lightning Trigger or 
a Stumbling Block: Mother Images and Roles in Classical Sufism’, Oriens 39/2 
(2011): 199–226, here 203.
46. Al-Sarrāj, Kitāb al-Lumaʿ. Al-Rūdhbārī also appears in numerous reports in 
al-Sulamī’s Ṭabaqāt (cited throughout as ‘Aḥmad ibn ʿAṭāʾ’), through al-Sarrāj.
47. TB 5:552, repeated in SAN 17:627; LM 1:222, No. 689/1:537–8, No. 635.
48. Radtke, Materialien, 217–59 (part D).
49. For instance, none of these figures receives individual treatment in Gramlich, 
Alte Vorbilder.
50. Melchert, ‘Early Renunciants’, 414–15. Compare with Michael Cooperson, 

 92 ] 
Jeremy Farrell
Classical Arabic Biography: The Heirs of the Prophets in the Age of al-Maʾmūn, 
Cambridge Studies in Islamic Civilization (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2000), 154–87, elaborating on Massignon’s description of the famous 
ascetic Bishr al-Ḥāfī (d. 227/841).
51. Melchert, ‘Piety of the Hadith Folk’, 413.
52. Melchert, ‘The Ḥanābila and Early Sufis’, and Melchert, ‘al-Barbahārī’, EI3. 
Compare with the studies of later figures in George Makdisi, ‘The Hanbali School 
and Sufism’, in Actas IV. Congresso de Estudios Arabes e Islámicos: Coimbra-Lisboa 1 
a 8 de setembro de 1968 (Leiden: Brill, 1971), 71–84; reprinted in Religion, Law and 
Learning in Classical Islam, Variorum Collected Studies series, 347 (Burlington, 
VT: Variorum, 1991). Melchert (‘Transition’, 65–6) correctly recognises that 
not all opponents of the Sufis were necessarily hadith specialists or Ḥanābilah; 
compare with Maher Jarrar, ‘Ghulām Khalīl’, EI3.
53. Recep Şentürk, Narrative Social Structure: Anatomy of the Hadith Transmission 
Network 610–1505 (Palo Alto: Stanford University Press, 2005), 203–4, fig. 7.1.
54. Şentürk, Narrative Social Structure, 203. Note that Şentürk examines al-Dhahabī’s 
Tadhkirat al-ḥuffāẓ, Jalāl al-Dīn al-Suyūṭī’s (d. 911/1505) Ṭabaqāt al-ḥuffāẓ, and Ibn 
Ḥibbān al-Bustī’s (d. 354/965) Mashāhīr ʿulamāʾ al-amṣār.
55. Jonathan A. C. Brown, Hadith: Muhammad’s Legacy in the Medieval and Modern 
World (Oxford: Oneworld, 2009), 193–5. Compare with Massignon, Essay, 120–
2/83–4; thereafter (ibid., 184–91/127–34) reference to hadith mursal refers to 
late second-/eighth-century usage. Elsewhere (Passion 3:344–52/3:327–54), 
Massignon discusses al-Ḥallāj’s use of the isnād to relate visionary experiences, 
and his interpolation of celestial objects and phenomenological events in place 
of human tradents. Compare with S. M. Zwemer, ‘The So-Called Hadith Qudsi’, 
Moslem World 12/3 (1922): 263–75; William Graham, Divine Word and Prophetic 
Word in Early Islam: a Reconsideration of the Sources, with Special Reference to the 
Divine Saying or ḥadîth qudsî, Religion and Society, 7 (The Hague: Mouton, 1977); 
and Hamid Algar, ‘Hadith iv. in Sufism’, in Encyclopædia Iranica 11/5, 451–3.
56. Lahcen Daaïf, ‘Dévots et renonçants: L’autre catégorie de forgeurs de hadiths’, 
Arabica 57 (2010): 201–50, here 217–18.
57. Brown, Hadith, 184–91.
58. Brown, Hadith, 189.
59. Duncan B. Macdonald, ‘The Life of al-Ghazzālī, with Especial Reference to His 
Religious Experiences and Opinions’, Journal of the American Oriental Society 20 
(1899): 71–132, here 123–7.
60. Ignaz Goldziher, Introduction to Islamic Theology and Law, trans. Andras and Ruth 
Hamori, Modern Classics in Near Eastern Studies (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1981), 157–60; A. J. Arberry, ‘Qushayri as Traditionist’, in 
Johannes Pedersen (ed.), Studia Orientalia, Ioanni Pedersen septuagenario (Hauniea: 
E. Munksgaard, 1953), 12–20. On al-Qushayrī, generally, see now Martin Nguyen, 
Sufi Master and Qurʾan Scholar: Abū ’l-Qāsim al-Qushayrī and the Laṭāʾif al-ishārāt, 
Qurʾanic Studies series, 8 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, with the assistance 
of Institute of Ismaili Studies, 2012).
61. Cornell, Early Sufi Women, 43–7.

  
Early ‘Traditionist Sufis’  
[ 93
62. Florian Sobieroj, Ibn Ḫafīf aš-Šīrāzī und seine Schrift zur Novizenerziehung (Kitāb 
al-Iqtiṣād). Biographische Studien, Edition und Übersetzung, Beiruter Texte und 
Studien 57 (Beirut: Franz Steiner, 1998), 425 (Index), s.v., ‘Ḥadītfälschen’, 
‘Ḥadītgelehrte’ and ‘Ḥadītstudium’.
63. Karamustafa, Sufism, 57–8; Sobieroj, Ibn Ḫafīf, 133–4. Ibn Jahḍam’s reputation 
suffered in hadith-specialist circles. According to al-Dhahabī (SAN 17:275–6), he 
lied (yakdhib), and transmitted ‘catastrophically bad’ reports (maṣāʾib).
64. Christopher Melchert, ‘Abū Nuʿaym’s Sources for Ḥilyat al-awliyāʾ: Sufi and 
Traditionist’, in Geneviève Gobillot and Jean-Jacques Thibon (eds), Les maîtres 
soufis et leurs disciples IIIe–Ve siècles de l’hégire (IXe–XIe s.). Enseignement, formation 
et transmission (Beirut and Damascus: Presses de l’IFPO, 2012), 102–13, here 108.
65. Melchert, ‘Abū Nuʿaym’s Sources’, 107. However, this contradicts his earlier 
assertion (‘The Piety of the Hadith Folk’, 410) that, ‘the lines dividing hadith 
transmission . . . and Sufis may have been clear [later …], but the Ḥilya is evi-
dence that they were less so in Abū Nuʿaym’s’.
66. Melchert, ‘Piety of Hadith Folk’, 413.
67. The Arabic text (TB 8:145) reads: ‘maḍaytu ilá ʿAbbās al-Dūrī wa-anā ḥadathun wa-
katabtu ʿanhu majlisan wāḥidan’; repeated, citing al-Baghdādī, in SAN 15:559. The 
anecdote seems to have been first reported in al-Muḥassin al-Tanūkhī, Nishwār 
al-muḥāḍarah wa-akhbār al-mudhākarah, ed. ʿAbbūd al-Shālijī al-Maḥāmī, 7 vols 
(Beirut: Dār Ṣādir: 1995), 3:117; apud Florian Sobieroj, ‘The Muʿtazila and Sufism’, 
Frederik de Jong and Bernd Radtke (eds), Islamic Mysticism Contested (Leiden: 
Brill, 1999), 68–92, at 87 n. 95.
68. For the quotation, see Timothy McGrew, ‘The Argument from Silence’, Acta 
Analytica 29 (2014): 215–28, here 226. Melchert (‘Abū Nuʿaym’s Sources’, 102–6) 
has observed this phenomenon in a comparison of Abū Nuʿaym’s ḤA and dedi-
cated hadith works.
69. For Ibn ʿAṭāʾ, see Paul Nwyia, Trois oeuvres inédites de mystiques musulmanes, 
Nouvelle série: Langue arabe et pensée islamique, 7 (Beirut: Dar El-Machreq, 
1973), 25–32; Richard Gramlich, Abu ‘l-ʿAbbās Ibn ʿAṭāʾ: Sufi und Koranausleger, 
Abhandlungen für die Kunde des Morgenlandes 51, 2 (Stuttgart: Deutsche 
Morgenländische Gesellschaft, 1995); Martin Nguyen, ‘Ibn ʿAṭāʾ al-Ādamī’, EI3.
70. Sezgin, GAS 1:638, No. 8; Radtke, Materialien, xiii–v.
71. SAN 12:212–14. Melchert has not consulted this notice in which al-Dhahabī, 
following Abū Saʿīd al-Naqqāsh (d. 412/1021–2), identifies al-Ṭūsī as a teacher 
(ustādh) to the famous Sufi Abū Saʿīd al-Kharrāz (d. 277/888–9), the author of 
a highly regarded mystical treatise titled Kitāb al-Ṣidq. On their relationship, 
see Saab, ‘Ṣūfī Theory’, 25–7. On al-Naqqāsh, see the editors’ Introductions in 
al-Naqqāsh, Fawāʾid al-ʿIraqīyīn, ed. Majdī Fathī al-Sayyid (Cairo: Maktabat 
al-Qurʾān, 1410/1990) = ed. ʿAmr ʿAbd al-Munʿim Sālim (Cairo: Dār al-Ḍiyāʾ, 
2006). In the same notice al-Dhahabī transmits the testimony of Abū Bakr 
al-Marrūdhī (d. 275/888), who is quoted as asking Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal about 
al-Ṭūsī, with the latter responding, ‘I only know good things about him – a 
prayerful man (ṣāḥib al-ṣalāh).’
72. Melchert, ‘Ḥanābilah’, 357–8.

 94 ] 
Jeremy Farrell
73. Joseph Norment Bell, ‘Al-Sarrāj’s Maṣāriʿ al-ʿushshāq: a Ḥanbalite Work?’, JAOS 
99(2) (1979): 235–48, here 242–4. Al-Khuldī relies on Ibn Masrūq for more than 
half (28/52) of the transmissions in al-Fawāʾid.
74. G. H. A. Juynboll, Encyclopedia of Canonical Ḥadīth (Leiden: Brill, 2007), 131–4, and 
‘Anas b. Mālik’, EI3.
75. Abū ʿAbd Allāh Muḥammad ibn ʿAlī, Nawādir al-uṣūl fī maʿrifat aḥādīth al-rasūl 
wa-yalīhi Mirqāt al-wuṣūl ḥawāshī Nawādir al-uṣūl, ed. Muṣtafá ibn Ismāʿīl 
al-Dimashqī (Beirut: Dār Ṣādir, 1972; first published Istanbul, 1294/1877). For an 
appraisal of the manuscript tradition and concordance of hadith from the Sunni 
tradition, see Abdurrahman Aliy, ‘Nawādir al-Uṣūl’ des al-Ḥakīm al-Tirmidhī: 
Ein Beitrag zur mystischen Ḥadīth-Kommentierung (Inaugural-Dissertation: Ruhr 
Universität Bochum, 2003). Bernd Radtke argues that the work ‘offers a wealth 
of statements and thoughts about classical mysticism’, in Drei Schriften des 
Theosophen von Tirmid, Bibliotheca Islamica, 35b (Stuttgart: Franz Steiner, 1996), 
2. More generally, Yahya Maquet (‘al-Ḥakīm al-Tirmidhī’, EI2) argues that, 
‘[Al-Tirmidhī was] a traditionalist, he adopted numerous themes characteristic 
of the Ahl al-ḥadīth, refused to accept discussion of the Ḳurʾān and of the Sunna, 
repudiated kalām and controversies, rejected reason and personal opinion (raʾy), 
and showed clear sympathy for the Ḥanbalīs, and also for the Umayyads rather 
than the ʿAbbāsids’.
76. Abū ʿAbd al-Raḥmān al-Sulamī, Suʾālāt Abī ʿAbd al-Raḥmān al-Sulamī lil-
imām al-Dāraquṭnī fī al-jarḥ wa-al-taʿdīl wa-ʿilal al-ḥadīth, ed. Abū ʿUmar 
Muḥammad ibn ʿAlī al-Azharī, Silsalat al-suʾālāt al-ḥadīthīyah, 3 (Cairo: 
al-Fārūq al-Ḥadīthah, 1427/2006). Al-Dāraquṭnī also appears as an immediate 
informant in ṬṢ, 15/23.
77. The remaining accounts concern significant Followers like al-Ḥasan al-Baṣrī (d. 
110/728), Baghdadi Sufis like al-Junayd, or poetry.
78. In using these terms, I am indebted to the formulation of Jonathan A. C. 
Brown, ‘Criticism of the Proto-Hadith Canon: Al-Dāraquṭnī’s Adjustment of 
the Ṣaḥīḥayn’, Journal of Islamic Studies 15/1 (2004): 1–37. The works include 
al-Ṭabarānī’s al-Muʿjam al-kabīr, al-Muʿjam al-awsaṭ and al-Muʿjam al-ṣaghīr; 
al-Dāraquṭnī’s Mustakhraj; and Ibn Khuzaymah’s Ṣaḥīh.
79. The literature is voluminous. An approachable volume concerning struc-
tured cooperation and competition is Matthew O. Jackson, Social and Economic 
Networks (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2008). A standard reference 
of network measures is Mark E. Newman, Networks: An Introduction (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2008). I thank Paul Hooper for introducing me to these  
works.
80. For example: Richard Bulliet, Patricians of Nishapur: a Study in Medieval Islamic 
Social History (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1972); Carl Petry, The 
Civilian Elite of Cairo in the Later Middle Ages (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 1981); Monique Bernards, ‘Grammarians’ Circles of Learning: a Social 
Network Analysis’, in ʿAbbāsid Studies II: Occasional Papers of the School of ʿAbbāsid 
Studies, Leuven 28 June–1 July 2004, Orientalia Lovaniensia analecta, 177 (Leuven: 
Peeters, 2010), 143–64.

  
Early ‘Traditionist Sufis’  
[ 95
81. For one instance of this usage, juxtaposed to the otherwise excellent theoretical 
examination of a ‘canon’, see Brown, Canonization, app. 1.
82. On the ubiquity of the concept of hierarchies during this period, see Louise 
Marlow, Hierarchy and Egalitarianism in Islamic Literature (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1997). Compare with the formal investigation of Aaron Clauset, 
Chris Moore and Mark E. Newman, ‘Hierarchical Structure and the Prediction 
of Missing Links in Networks’, Nature 453 (2008): 90–101. On ‘niches’, see 
Manfred Laubichler and Jürgen Renn, ‘Extended Evolution: a Conceptual 
Framework for Integrating Regulatory Networks and Niche Construction’, 
Journal of Experimental Zoology (Mol. Dev. Evol.) 3248 (2015): 565–77; and 
Jürgen Renn and Manfred Laubichler, ‘Extended Evolution and the History 
of Knowledge’, in Friedrich Stadler (ed.), Integrated History and Philosophy 
of Science: Problems, Perspectives and Case Studies (Berlin: Springer, 2017), 
109–25. I thank Nayely Velez-Cruz for bringing these last two works to my  
attention.
83. On these and other metrics of centrality, see Newman, Networks, 168–92.
84. Mark E. Newman, ‘Finding Community Structure in Networks Using the 
Eigenvectors of Matrices’, Physical Review E 74036104 (2006): 1–19; Philip 
Bonacich, ‘Some Unique Properties of Eigenvector Centrality’, Social Networks 
25/4 (2007): 555–64.
85. See esp. Maxim Romanov, ‘Toward Abstract Models of Islamic History,’ in Elias 
Muhanna (ed.), Digital Humanities and Islamic and Middle East Studies (Berlin: 
Walter de Gruyter, 2015), 117–50.
86. The point is raised in the following reviews: Behnam Sadeki, ‘Review: Narrative 
Social Structure . . . by Recep Şentürk’, Journal of Interdisciplinary History 38(2) 
(2007): 328–9; Christopher Melchert, ‘Review: Narrative Social Structure . . . by 
Recep Senturk’, Journal of Islamic Studies 19/1 (2008): 115–17.
87. Şentürk, Narrative Social Structure, 38–41.
88. Şentürk, Narrative Social Structure, 137, fig. 5.1.
89. Şentürk, Narrative Social Structure, 31, 41–3. Brown states, ‘the canonical culture 
surrounding the Ṣaḥīḥayn seems to have emerged in Baghdad in . . . al-Dāraquṭnī’s 
career in the mid- to late fourth/tenth century’ (Canonization, 264).
90. It is possible that either al-Dhahabī’s or al-Suyūṭī’s peculiar conception of the 
contours of the earlier generations within the ḥuffāẓ network was influenced by 
the hard boundaries of group specialisation that obtained in Mamlūk Syria and 
Egypt.
91. Duncan J. Watts, Small Worlds: the Dynamics of Networks between Order and 
Randomness, Princeton Studies in Complexity (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 1999), 23–5.
92. Melchert, ‘Review’, advises the collection of this type of data.
93. See the comments on the distortional effects of singly-connected nodes in 
Newman, Networks, 188.
94. Mathieu Bastian, Sebastian Heymann and Mathieu Jacomy, ‘Gephi: An Open 
Source Software for Exploring and Manipulating Networks’, in Proceedings of the 
Third International ICWSM Conference: International AAAI Conference on Weblogs 

 96 ] 
Jeremy Farrell
and Social Media (2009): 361–2. The total of unweighted edges is 1,666, meaning 
TB and SNA mutually confirm 330 edges (~ 19.8 per cent of the total).
95. ‘Non-trivial’ means there is at least one non-zero figure computed for five places 
past the decimal.

 [ 97 ]
CHAPTER
5
The Common Link and its Relation to 
Hadith Terminology
Ali Aghaei*
Introduction
The ‘common link’ is not a newly coined term. Its history goes back to the 
middle of the twentieth century when Joseph Schacht first used it. Schacht, 
who was mainly concerned with the dating of hadiths,1 discovered a peculiar 
phenomenon in their isnāds: the ‘common transmitters’. If different isnāds 
of a given hadith are gathered and put together, almost all of them meet 
at a certain point at a common transmitter, whom he named the ‘common 
link’, and then through a single strand reach back to an authority such as 
a Companion or the Prophet himself.2 According to Schacht, ‘the existence 
of a significant common link (N.N.) in all or most isnāds of a given tradition 
would be a strong indication in favour of its having originated in the time 
of N.N.’.3 In other words, he believed that drawing on information obtained 
through the common link one can identify the origin of that particular hadith 
in terms of time and place.4 From his time onwards, ‘the common link’ has 
played a prominent role in modern hadith studies and has been used by 
those scholars who would date hadiths based on isnād analysis.5
But was this phenomenon recognised by Muslim hadith scholars and tra-
ditionists (muḥaddithūn), and can one find some traces of this recognition in 
the Islamic hadith literature as well? Hadith scholars have coined a plethora 
of technical terms (muṣṭalaḥāt al-ḥadīth) to define the various features of 
hadiths and the qualifications of their transmitters. Is it possible to find 
amongst them some terms that, in one way or another, correspond to the 
common link or be considered as its equivalent?
In his prominent study, Schacht notices that Muslim hadith scholars 
already recognised this phenomenon:
It was observed, though of course not recognised in its implications, by 
the Muhammadan scholars themselves, for instance by al-Tirmidhī in the 

 98 ] 
Ali Aghaei
concluding chapter of his collection of traditions. He calls traditions with 
N.N. as a common link in their isnāds ‘the traditions of N.N.’, and they form a 
great part of the traditions which he calls gharīb, that is transmitted by a single 
 transmitter at any stage of the isnād.6
With this clarification, Schacht related the common link to the ‘single trans-
mitter’ (munfarid/mutafarrid) in gharīb (literally ‘strange’) hadith. He was also 
aware that along with the isnāds with a common link, there are sometimes 
other isnāds that sidestep the common link.7 At first glance, it seems that in 
such a case, ‘the common link is not alone and his hadith is not gharīb’.8 But 
Schacht regards these strands as ‘additional’ and possibly ‘introduced later’. 
He means that they originated ‘by the creation of improvements [i.e., the 
backward growth of isnāds] which would take their place beside the original 
chain of transmitters, or by the process which [Schacht] described as spread 
of isnāds’.9
G. H. A. Juynboll, like Schacht, held that the common link was known to 
Muslim hadith scholars. However, ‘they never took the issue any further but 
for hints at it in the case of auspicious hadith forgers or allusions to certain 
key figures’, and therefore they did not develop or expand upon its concept 
and function as much as it deserved.10 Juynboll elaborated on the common-
link phenomenon in several articles.11 He pointed, here and there, to the 
connection between ‘single transmitter’ in gharīb traditions and the common 
link.12 He also suggested that the term madār (literally ‘pivot’, ‘turning point’) 
could be considered the equivalent of the common link.13 Finally, in an article 
devoted to technical terms in classical hadith literature, he showed that the 
terms madār and tafarrud/infirād (isolated transmission) and their cognate 
verbal forms, namely, dāra, yadūru ʿalā and tafarrada/infarada bi-, have a firm 
connection to the common link. Therefore, one may certainly use the term 
madār as an equivalent for the common link.14
Juynboll also noticed that in hadith works, sometimes beside the isnāds of 
a hadith that branch out from one and the same transmitter, other transmis-
sion lines (ṭuruq; sing. ṭarīq) are also observable which do not pass through 
him. According to the traditional perspective, the existence of such trans-
mission lines entails that the transmitter in question could not be the madār 
and that his transmission line was not a single strand (munfarid).15 Juynboll, 
however, considered these additional isnād strands, which have usually 
been called mutābiʿāt (sing. mutābiʿ; literally ‘following’) or shawāhid (sing. 
shāhid; literally ‘witness’) in hadith literature, as fabrications of a somewhat 
later time and called them ‘diving’ strands.16 Thus, from amongst the Islamic 
hadith terms, Juynboll picked out some – apparently apt and appropriate – 
equivalents for both the common link and diving strands.
Halit Özkan, in his article ‘The Common Link and its Relation to the 
Madār’, both examined the use of the term madār in the Islamic hadith litera-
ture and sought to disprove Juynboll’s claim. According to him, because of 
‘significant differences between the understanding and use of madār by both 

  
The Common Link  
[ 99
classical and contemporary Muslim scholars, on the one hand, and Juynboll’s 
notion of the common link, on the other’, these two terms cannot be consid-
ered equivalents.17 To highlight the conceptual and functional differences 
between the two terms, the madār and the common link, Özkan cites some 
examples in which transmitters from the generation of the Companions or 
the old Successors (kibār al-tābiʿīn) were regarded as the madārs of hadiths.18 
According to him, this usage of the term madār is evidently in contrast to 
the concept of the common link according to Juynboll, who holds that ‘no 
Companions served as a common link (or madārs)’ and ‘the first madār, 
Abū al-ʿĀliya Rufayʿ b. Mihrān al-Riyāḥī, was a Successor’.19 Thus, ‘if, like 
Juynboll, we treat the terms common link and madār as equivalent’, he argues, 
‘pace Juynboll, the dissemination of a hadith would have taken place in the 
generation of the Companions, not in that of the Successors’.20
In his second objection, Özkan points to the existence of several of madārs 
in the isnāds of a hadith, which contradicts Juynboll’s idea. According to 
Juynboll, ‘there can be only one common link in an isnād’ and ‘after the 
common link, there may be one or more partial common links’, whereas 
Özkan cites examples in which Muslim scholars designate more than one 
person as the madār of a single hadith, sometimes in the same generation.21 
He then asserts that, if one considers the madārs in these examples as the 
equivalent of common links one faces even more problems. First, if we 
ascribe the wording of a particular hadith to the madār, as Juynboll does 
for the common link, then which of the two or three madārs formulated the 
wording of the hadith? Secondly, how can we explain Muslim scholars’ 
recognition of the existence of transmitters other than the madār on the same 
level as the madār without identifying them as such?22
Özkan’s third objection is about the relation between the madār and tafar-
rud. He claims that, ‘Most Muslim scholars do not treat these two terms as 
synonyms.’23 To prove his claim, he refers to the cases in which the term 
madār is concurrently used with expressions like ‘he is not the only transmit-
ter’ or ‘his hadith has a mutābiʿ or shāhid’. He thinks that ‘If madār and tafarrud 
were synonyms, this usage would be meaningless.’24
In this chapter, through an analytical study of the meaning and application 
of the terms mentioned above in the works of early, late and contemporary 
Muslim scholars, I will verify Schacht and Juynboll’s suggested equiva-
lent terms from Islamic tradition for the common link.25 Henceforth, I will 
compare different interpretations of Western scholars of this phenomenon 
with those of early Muslim scholars. I will also show that the points on which 
Özkan has based his arguments are not sufficient to justify his criticism of 
Juynboll’s suggested equivalents for the term common link.
The Use of the Term gharīb by al-Tirmidhī
Al-Tirmidhī (d. 279/892) in his book Kitāb al-ʿIlal – which appears at the 
end of his famous hadith collection – divides the gharīb hadiths into four 

 100 ] 
Ali Aghaei
categories, of which the first two completely and the fourth one may partially 
correspond to the term common link:
1. A hadith transmitted through a single strand (lā yurwá illā min wajh 
wāḥid); for instance, about a hadith that Ḥammād ibn Salamah 
(d. 167/784) narrates from Abū al-ʿUsharāʾ, the unknown (majhūl) 
transmitter, from his father from the Prophet, he states: ‘This hadith 
is transmitted only (tafarrada bihī) by Ḥammād ibn Salamah from Abū 
al-ʿUsharāʾ, and no other hadith narrated from Abū al-ʿUsharāʾ from 
his father is known.’ Since this hadith is disseminated only on the 
authority of Ḥammād, al-Tirmidhī has called it ‘the hadith of Ḥammād 
ibn Salamah’.26
2. A hadith known only on the authority of one of the transmitters (lā 
yuʿrafu illā min ḥadīthih), but would become well-known through being 
prolifically narrated from him; for instance, the hadith of the ‘prohibi-
tion of selling or donating the patronage’ (al-nahy ʿan bayʿ al-walāʾ wa-
hibatih) is known only through ʿAbd Allāh ibn Dīnār (d. 127/744–5), 
and hence al-Tirmidhī has regarded it as the hadith of ʿAbd Allāh ibn 
Dīnār. For al-Tirmidhī, other isnāds that do not go through ʿAbd Allāh 
are errors (wahm),27 as had already been alleged by Muslim ibn al-Ḥajjāj 
(d. 261/875).28
3. A hadith with an addition (ziyādah) in the matn (text). In al-Tirmidhī’s 
view, ‘This addition may be acceptable provided that it is transmit-
ted by the one who has reliable retentiveness (ḥifẓ).’29 He cites as an 
example for this case a hadith by Mālik ibn Anas (d. 179/795) from 
Nāfiʿ from Ibn ʿUmar about zakāt al-fiṭr, in whose text the expression 
‘min al-muslimīn’ is an addition. Whereas many others had transmitted 
this very hadith by Nāfiʿ without this addition, some like al-Shāfiʿī (d. 
204/820) and Ibn Ḥanbal (d. 241/855) argued and decided on the basis 
of Mālik’s addition.30
4. A hadith regarded as gharīb due to the isnād through which it is trans-
mitted, whose matn is transmitted through several other isnāds. In 
other words, there is a problem in one of the isnāds which leads to 
its being considered gharīb. For example, the hadith by the Prophet 
that reads, ‘The believer eats only (what fills) one intestine, while the 
unbeliever eats (what fills) seven intestines’ (al-muʾminu yaʾkulu fī miʿan 
wāḥidin wa-l-kāfiru yaʾkulu fī sabʿati amʿāʾ), is transmitted through Abū 
Kurayb Muḥammad ibn al-ʿAlāʾ (d. 248/862) < Abū Usāmah Ḥammād 
ibn Usāmah (d. 201/816–17) < Burayd ibn ʿAbd Allāh ibn Abī Burdah 
< his grandfather Abū Burdah < Abū Mūsá al-Ashʿarī. Al-Tirmidhī 
confirmed that this hadith was transmitted from the Prophet through 
different authorities,31 but the isnād of the already mentioned version 
is gharīb. Then he quotes al-Bukhārī (d. 256/870): ‘This is the hadith of 
Abū Kurayb from Abū Usāmah, being known only through this very 
isnād.’32

  
The Common Link  
[ 101
The first two categories are not much different33 because in both a hadith by 
one shaykh (the hadith master) is transmitted through a single strand (tafar-
rada bih) and at times because of several transmission lines from that shaykh, 
it has become well-known (yashtahiru ‘l-ḥadīthu li-kathrati man rawá ʿanhu).34 
As for the third and fourth categories, the case is a bit different. In these two, 
the matn of the hadith is supposed to have been transmitted through various 
strands, but one of the transmitters presents yet a different version of that 
hadith containing information additional to the already known version (the 
third category), or gives a single strand not mentioned before him (the fourth 
category). However, in the two latter categories, the tafarrud of the trans-
mitter is the key element in the gharābah of the hadith. Therefore, the gharīb 
hadith may be divided into two general categories: (1) a hadith transmitted 
only through one strand, while its matn is not known through any other 
strand – whether it would become well-known later as a result of the multi-
plicity of the transmission through a single transmitter (munfarid) or not; and 
(2) a hadith of which a version is transmitted isolated (mutafarrid) through a 
single strand, but whose matn is known through various strands – whether 
there would be additions in its matn or not.35
It is evident that the major element in gharābah of both the categories is 
tafarrud. Through studying the hadiths which al-Tirmidhī in his hadith col-
lection considered gharīb, this very fact would be confirmed. Beside many 
cases in which al-Tirmidhī implicitly refers to the tafarrud of the transmission 
through expressions such as ‘it is not known but only through his transmis-
sion’ (lā yuʿrafu illā min ḥadīthih) or ‘it is not narrated save through a single 
strand’ (lā yurwá illā min wajh wāḥid), there are also several cases where he 
takes the tafarrud of the transmitter as an indicator to the gharābah of hadiths.36
The Term gharīb in the Terminology of the Hadith Critics
One can find examples of the relation between the two terms gharīb and tafar-
rud in the works of the early hadith critics. Some examples will be mentioned 
here:
• Ibn Maʿīn (d. 233/847) regarded a hadith by Nūḥ ibn Darrāj as gharīb, 
for – as he would claim – ‘No one besides him transmits this tradition’ 
(laysa yarwīhi aḥadun ghayruh).37
• Ibn Ḥanbal (d. 241/855) regarded a hadith by Hushaym ibn Bashīr 
(d. 183/799) from Yaḥyá ibn Saʿīd ibn Qays al-Ansạ̄rī (d. 144/761–2) 
as gharīb, for beside him no one transmitted it from Yaḥyá ibn Saʿīd.38
• Ibn ʿAdī (d. 365/976) regarded gharīb a hadith that Abū al-Miqdām 
ʿAmr ibn Thābit al-Kūfī (d. 172/788–9) transmitted from Ismāʿīl ibn 
Khālid al-Aḥmasī and affirmed that ‘Apart from ʿAmr ibn Thābit, no 
one else has transmitted it.’39
• Al-Dāraquṭnī (d. 385/995) used some expressions indicating tafarrud 
along with the word gharīb. For instance, he considered gharīb a hadith 

 102 ] 
Ali Aghaei
transmitted from Sulaymān ibn Mihrān al-Aʿmash (d. 148/765) by Jarīr 
ibn ʿAbd al-Ḥamīd (d. 188/804) because nobody else has transmitted 
it from al-Aʿmash.40
As indicated so far, the major feature of the gharīb is that it has been trans-
mitted by only one transmitter through a single strand. Hence, Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ 
(d. 643/1245), in defining the gharīb, writes, ‘The hadith which one of the 
transmitters is alone in transmitting is called gharīb.’41 This is so obvious that 
later hadith scholars did not even distinguish between the gharīb and the 
fard (isolated hadith). Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī (d. 852/1449) defines the gharīb 
as such: ‘The hadith that only a single person transmitted; this tafarrud can 
occur in any part of the isnād.’42 To clarify, he then adds that it is possible that 
this tafarrud would happen either: (1) in ‘the base (aṣl) of the isnād’ – that is, 
that part of the isnād which all the complete isnāds have in common, even if 
after this various strands would branch out from a single transmitter;43 or (2) 
in the middle of the isnād, where several transmitters relate a hadith from a 
Companion, while a single transmitter is alone (munfarid) in relating it from 
one of those transmitters. In the latter case, the hadith can be one of those 
called well-known (mashhūr) per se, yet considering the single transmitter, 
the hadith would be called fard or gharīb. According to Ibn Ḥajar, the former 
would be called al-fard al-muṭlaq (‘absolutely isolated’) and the latter al-fard 
al-nisbī (‘relatively isolated’).44
Dividing the fard into ‘absolute’ and ‘relative’ is compatible with the 
above-mentioned twofold classification of the gharīb. Because the attributes 
‘absolute’ and ‘relative’ refer to the nature of the infirād/tafarrud of the hadith, 
if the hadith is transmitted through a single strand and no other isnād can 
be found for it, the fard will be considered ‘absolute’. On the contrary, if the 
hadith is transmitted through several isnāds, but one transmitter is alone in 
providing his special isnād strand, his hadith will be called fard due to that 
certain isnād, even if the hadith is well-known.45
The classification of the fard as ‘absolute’ and ‘relative’ goes back to 
Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ. After him, hadith scholars followed it.46 Before Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ, 
al-Ḥākim al-Naysābūrī mentions several categories of the fard – including 
the tafarrud of the people of a certain city, that of a certain transmitter from 
one of the hadith authorities, and that of the people of a certain city from the 
people of another city – together with some examples for each category.47 
Indeed, it seems that al-Ḥākim did not intend to give a perfect definition of 
the term fard but only presented examples for various fards. Therefore, one 
can put each one of his examples into either the absolute category or the 
relative one. For instance, some of the examples he has given for the tafar-
rud of the people of a certain city are absolute fard while others are relative. 
Nevertheless, by adding sub-categories to the twofold classification of the 
fard, some later hadith scholars tried to harmonise Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ’s definition 
with that of al-Ḥākim.48

  
The Common Link  
[ 103
The mutābiʿāt, the shawāhid and the Process of iʿtibār al-ḥadīth
Yet how can one distinguish al-fard al-muṭlaq from al-fard al-nisbī? It becomes 
clear through the early hadith critics’ statements that, to study and criticise 
each hadith, they collected its different isnāds and thence, by comparing 
them with one another, alongside other evidence, decided on the authentic-
ity of the hadith. According to Ibn Ḥanbal, ‘one cannot understand a hadith 
if its transmission lines are not gathered’.49 Ibn al-Madīnī (d. 234/849) con-
cedes that ‘the errors of a hadith will remain unrecognised if its  transmission 
lines are not collected’.50 Even to estimate the qualification of a transmitter, 
they would compile and investigate his hadiths.51 Ibn Ḥibbān al-Bustī (d. 
354/965) in his Ṣaḥīḥ explains the procedure of  authentication (iʿtibār) of 
hadiths by means of an example:
Suppose that Ḥammād ibn Salamah [(d. 167/784)] transmitted a hadith from 
Ayyūb [al-Sakhtiyānī (d. 131/749?)] from [Muḥammad] Ibn Sīrīn [(d. 110/729)] 
from Abū Hurayrah from the Prophet and we do not find this hadith with any 
other student of Ayyūb …: we first examine this hadith to see whether several 
of Ḥammād’s students transmitted it from him or only one. If it is found that 
several of his students transmitted it [from him], then it is known that Ḥammād 
indeed transmitted it. If it is found to be the transmission of a weak [transmitter] 
from him [i.e., Ḥammād], then it is ascribed to that transmitter, not to him. When 
it is established that he [i.e., Ḥammād] did transmit from Ayyūb something that 
no one else did . . . it should be examined to see whether any reliable transmitter 
other than Ayyūb transmitted this hadith from Ibn Sīrīn. If that is found, then 
it is known that the hadith has an original version (aṣl) to which it goes back. 
If what is described is not found, it should then be examined to see whether 
any reliable transmitter other than Ibn Sīrīn transmitted this hadith from Abū 
Hurayrah. If that is found, then it is known that the hadith has an original 
version. If what is said is not found, then it should be examined to see whether 
anyone transmitted this hadith from the Prophet other than Abū Hurayrah. If 
that is found, it is established that the hadith has an original version. If it is not 
found . . . then it is known that the report is undoubtedly a forgery and that the 
transmitter who alone transmitted it (tafarrada bihī) is the one who forged it.52
Through this detailed clarification, it becomes evident that in early times 
iʿtibār al-ḥadīth includes the comprehensive study of the transmission lines 
of the hadith.53
The usage of the term iʿtibār, however, becomes looser with later hadith 
scholars. In their terminology, iʿtibār simply means to study a certain hadith 
that is transmitted isolated to find out whether the hadith is also narrated by 
other transmitters or not. This analysis begins with the original transmitter’s 
shaykh and goes on to the last part of the isnād; that is, the Companion. In 
other words, one should investigate to see whether the hadith is transmitted 
by other transmitters from the shaykh of the original transmitter or not; if not, 

 104 ] 
Ali Aghaei
from the shaykh of that shaykh, and so on. This process will be repeated until 
it reaches the Companion. The hadith that is found on one of these stages 
(ṭabaqāt) is called mutābiʿ (pl. mutābiʿāt), and this process of investigation is 
named mutābaʿah. If the mutābiʿ is found in none of these isnād stages, then it 
is investigated whether a hadith with a similar meaning is also transmitted 
or not. Such a hadith is called shāhid (pl. shawāhid), and the process is named 
istishhād. A hadith lacking mutābiʿāt and shawāhid is called al-fard al-muṭlaq.54
It should be noted that, compared with the original version (aṣl) of the hadith, 
the mutābiʿāt and the shawāhid are less authoritative. They are to be transmit-
ted merely to strengthen the aṣl; in other words, one would trust the aṣl but 
neither the mutābiʿāt nor the shawāhid.55 Therefore, Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ mentions that 
al-Bukhārī and Muslim would at times use, as their mutābiʿāt and shawāhid, the 
narrations of those whose hadiths alone could not be used as proof (lā yuḥtajju 
bi-ḥadīthihī waḥdah) and would sometimes even be considered ‘weak’ trans-
mitters (ḍaʿīf; pl. ḍuʿafāʾ).56 As al-Qāḍī ʿIyāḍ (d. 544/1149) explains, the selec-
tion and categorisation of hadiths in Muslim’s Ṣaḥīḥ are based on this very 
principle. The hadiths of his Ṣaḥīḥ are of three groups: the first group are the 
hadiths of those whose ‘retentiveness’ (ḥifẓ) and ‘accuracy’ (itqān) are agreed 
upon; the second group are the hadiths of those who are considered to have 
lesser retentiveness and accuracy; and, finally come the hadiths of the third 
group, whose ‘reliability’ (thiqah) is disputed. In each chapter of his book, 
Muslim has ordered the hadiths according to the afore-mentioned categories: 
the hadiths belonging to the first category come first as aṣl and are followed by 
the hadiths of the second and third categories as mutābiʿ or shāhid.57 Another 
example for this claim can be found in the terminology employed in assessing 
transmitters’ reliability (al-jarḥ wa-l-taʿdīl). Ibn Abī Ḥātim al-Rāzī (d. 327/938) 
presents an eight-level classification for transmitter competence in a descend-
ing order. On the highest level are placed thiqah (reliable) and mutqin (accu-
rate) transmitters, whose hadiths could be used as proof (yuḥtajju bihī), and 
on the lowest level matrūk al-ḥadīth (abandoned in hadith) and kadhdhāb (liar) 
transmitters. From amongst all of them, the hadiths of those who belong to 
the lowest level of reliable transmitters, that is, ṣāliḥ al-ḥadīth (good in hadith), 
and the first three levels of unreliable transmitters that are disparaged, that 
is, layyin al-ḥadīth (soft in hadith), laysa bi-qawī (not strong) and ḍaʿīf al-ḥadīth 
(weak in hadith), are used in iʿtibār al-ḥadīth.58
Tafarrud and its Relation to the Terms shādhdh and munkar
Early hadith scholars held a strict position regarding tafarrud of transmit-
ters. In the process of iʿtibār al-ḥadīth, if they failed to find a mutābiʿ or a 
shāhid, they would simply label that particular hadith shādhdh (anomalous) 
or munkar (unfamiliar) and set it aside. Al-Khaṭīb al-Baghdādī (d. 463/1071) 
dedicates a whole chapter of his book al-Kifāyah to the negative statements of 
some early hadith critics, namely, Shuʿbah ibn al-Ḥajjāj (d. 160/776–7), ʿAbd 
al-Raḥmān ibn al-Mahdī (d. 198/814) and Ibn Ḥanbal, about the shādhdh, 

  
The Common Link  
[ 105
munkar and gharīb.59 According to Ibn Rajab al-Ḥanbalī (d. 795/1393), if 
a hadith was transmitted by a single transmitter and lacked a mutābiʿ, the 
early hadith scholars ‘would consider it a defect (ʿillah) in that hadith . . . 
and fard hadiths even from the reliable authorities would not be accepted’.60 
Quoting Abū Bakr Aḥmad ibn Hārūn al-Bardījī (d. 301/914), who defines 
munkar as ‘a hadith that a person would transmit from the Companions or 
the Successors whose matn could not be recognised otherwise than through 
him’, Ibn Rajab regards the terms fard and munkar as equivalents.61 In order 
to affirm this claim, he cites various examples regarding which critics such as 
Ibn Ḥanbal, al-Bardījī and Abū Ḥātim al-Rāzī (d. 277/890) considered some 
hadiths transmitted by reliable transmitters to be munkar.62 The definitions 
suggested for the term shādhdh by al-Ḥākim al-Naysābūrī (d. 405/1014) and 
Abū Yaʿlá al-Khalīlī (d. 446/1054) are also based on tafarrud: a hadith that 
‘is transmitted isolated and has no mutābiʿ’ – even though al-Ḥākim con-
siders the ‘reliability of the transmitter’ a necessary condition for the given 
hadith in order to be regarded as shādhdh,63 while al-Khalīlī does not make it 
dependent on any condition.64 As Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ rightly conceived, the defini-
tions of al-Ḥākim and al-Khalīlī entail the equivalence of fard and shādhdh, 
and as a result lead to the rejection of hadiths regarded as fard.65
The position of the Muslim jurists and later hadith scholars, however, 
was gradually adjusted over time. Revising the early hadith scholars’ ter-
minology, they tried to provide a ground for accepting those fards which 
were transmitted by reliable transmitters (thiqāt). Ibn Ḥazm al-Andalusī (d. 
456/1064) was the first to state that, ‘One should accept a hadith that the 
reliable transmitter related from the Prophet through a reliable transmitter 
. . . whether that hadith is transmitted through other transmission lines or 
transmitted only through that single strand.’66 This idea implies the categori-
cal acceptance of the isolated transmission of the reliable transmitter (tafarrud 
al-thiqah), and it was followed by other hadith scholars and jurists after Ibn 
Ḥazm, such as Ibn al-Qaṭṭān al-Fāsī (d. 628/1231), who believed that infirād 
(equivalent to tafarrud) ‘would cause no defect in a hadith, so long as its 
transmitter was reliable’.67
Accordingly, using a statement ascribed to al-Shāfiʿī, Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ presents 
yet a new definition for the term shādhdh (and also munkar).68 According to 
him:
when a transmitter is alone in transmitting a hadith, it should be examined. If the 
hadith he transmitted conflicts with what was transmitted by someone superior 
to him in retentiveness and accuracy, the hadith that he is alone in transmitting 
is shādhdh and munkar. If in his narration there is no conflict with what someone 
else transmitted – and it is something only he (and no one else) transmitted – 
then the transmitter who is alone in transmitting it is examined. If he is upright 
(ʿadl) and retentive (ḥāfiẓ) and his exactitude and accuracy may be trusted, 
then the hadith that he is alone in transmitting is accepted, and his being alone 
in transmitting the hadith does not impugn it . . . If he is one of those whose 

 106 ] 
Ali Aghaei
retentiveness and accuracy in transmission may not be trusted for the hadith 
that he is alone in transmitting, then his tafarrud pierces it and tears it from the 
domain of sound (ṣaḥīḥ) hadith.69
Finally, Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ divides the rejected shādhdh into two groups: (1) the 
fard that conflicts with that of the reliable transmitter; and (2) the fard whose 
transmitter does not possess sufficient reliability and precision to counter-
act the unfamiliarity and weakness that isolation and anomaly engender.70 
He then takes the munkar to be synonymous with the rejected shādhdh and 
repeats this very twofold classification for that as well.71 The hadith scholars 
after Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ also repeated the same pattern and hence prevented many 
fards from being considered munkar or shādhdh.72
The madār of the Hadith
Although the term madār is not defined as a technical term in the manuals of 
hadith terminology (muṣṭalaḥ al-ḥadīth), studying its prevalent and diverse 
use in the hadith literature, one can identify its technical meaning. To distin-
guish the usage of this word as a technical term in hadith terminology from 
its other applications, one should consider the context in which the term 
madār is used.
In those cases in which the word madār is used to signify one single 
 transmitter – the most frequent application of this word in the hadith 
 literature – one can regard it as a technical term. This term mostly follows 
formulas such as ‘The madār of this hadith is upon so-and-so (transmitter)’ 
(madāru ’l-ḥadīthi ʿalá fulān).73 Sometimes it is used in a verbal form like 
‘This hadith revolves around so-and-so (transmitter)’ (yadūru ’l-ḥadīth ʿalá 
fulān).74 At times, synonymous nouns and verbs are also used to indicate 
the same; for instance, rajaʿa, yarjiʿu instead of dāra, yadūru, following the 
pattern ‘This hadith goes back to so-and-so (transmitter)’ (yarjiʿu ’l-ḥadīthu ilá 
fulān). Corroborating this interpretation is the concurrent use of these words; 
for example, ‘This report has no madār to which it could go back’ (laysa l-il-
khabari madārun yarjiʿu ilayh);75 ‘Their madār and their return (rujūʿ) are to 
so-and-so (transmitter)’ (madāruhum wa-rujūʿuhum ilá fulān);76 ‘The madār of 
this hadith goes back to so-and-so (transmitter)’ (madāru ‘l-ḥadīthi yarjiʿu ilá 
fulān).77 Other expressions are also applied indicating a madār in the isnāds 
of a hadith; for instance, ‘This hadith is known through so-and-so (transmit-
ter)’ (hādhā ‘l-ḥadīthu maʿrūfun bi-fulān,78 hādhā ’l-ḥadīthu yuʿrafu bi-fulān or 
lā yuʿrafu hādhā ’l-ḥadīthu illā bi-fulān79), or ‘this hadith belongs to so-and-so 
(transmitter)’ (al-ḥadīthu li-fulān).80 These expressions are comparable to what 
al-Tirmidhī uses for gharīb hadiths.81
Hadith scholars have used the term madār for certain hadiths with a 
unique feature: those hadiths, although transmitted with various isnāds, 
that all have a common transmitter, with the rest of the isnād82 remaining 
the same from that common transmitter to the Prophet. This transmitter, 

  
The Common Link  
[ 107
who is the converging point where all the different isnāds of a hadith meet 
and who transmits the hadith through a single strand from the Prophet, is 
called madār. This feature fits very well the aforementioned definition of the 
common link.83 As we have already seen, this phenomenon is called al-fard 
al-muṭlaq or gharīb in hadith terminology.84 The typical example of this phe-
nomenon is the famous hadith of intention: ‘Deeds are to be appraised only 
by their intentions’ (innamā l-aʿmālu bi-n-nīyāt). This hadith is found in the 
hadith collections with various isnāds that all go back to Yaḥyá ibn Saʿīd ibn 
Qays al-Anṣārī (d. 144/761–2?). Thenceforth, Yaḥyá transmits it through a 
single strand, Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm al-Taymī (d. 120/737–8) < ʿAlqamah 
ibn Waqqāṣ al-Laythī < ʿUmar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb < the Prophet.85 This reveals 
why al-Khalīlī regarded Yaḥyá as the madār of this hadith.86
The Usage of the Term madār
In early hadith literature, the term madār does not appear frequently. Its 
earliest usage is apparently in a saying by the well-known hadith scholar 
ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn al-Mahdī, describing a mursal (‘loose’) hadith by 
Abū al-ʿĀliyah Rufayʿ ibn Mihrān al-Riyāḥī (d. 93/711–12) about laughter 
during prayer (al-ḍaḥik fī al-ṣalāh). Abū al-ʿĀliyah is regarded as the madār, 
since different transmission lines of this hadith go back to him. When ʿAlī 
ibn al-Madīnī, the famous hadith scholar and critic, asked ʿAbd al-Raḥmān 
about other transmission lines of this hadith, in which Abū al-ʿĀliyah is not 
included, he replied: laysa yadūru hādhā ’l-ḥadīthu illā ʿalá Abī ’l-ʿĀliyah (‘this 
hadith revolves only around Abū al-ʿĀliyah’).87
Another early use of the term madār – and, of course, in a yet different 
context – can be found in ʿAlī ibn al-Madīnī’s ʿIlal. By studying the isnāds of 
the hadiths and classifying them in four different centres, namely, Mecca, 
Medina, Basra and Kufa, Ibn al-Madīnī identifies six persons as the bases 
of isnāds: Ibn Shihāb al-Zuhrī (d. 124/742) in Medina, ʿAmr ibn Dīnār (d. 
126/743–4) in Mecca, Qatādah ibn Diʿāmah al-Sadūsī (d. 118/736) and Yaḥyá 
ibn Abī Kathīr (d. 132/749–50) in Basra, and Abū Isḥāq ʿAmr ibn ʿAbd Allāh 
al-Sabīʿī (d. 127/744–5) and Sulaymān ibn Mihrān al-Aʿmash (d. 148/765) in 
Kufa.88 They are, in fact, certain famous transmitters from different hadith 
centres who alone transmitted various hadiths and these very hadiths were 
spread only through them. Al-Ḥākim concedes that ‘each of these hadith 
authorities alone transmitted from some shaykhs so that beside him no one 
else transmitted from them.’89 In a chapter titled ‘Those from whom no one 
has related except for a single transmitter’, al-Ḥākim cites the names of some 
of these hadith authorities,90 including al-Zuhrī, who was alone in transmit-
ting from more than twenty Successors,91 ʿAmr ibn Dīnār, Yaḥyá ibn Saʿīd 
al-Anṣārī, Abū Isḥāq al-Sabīʿī, and Hishām ibn ʿUrwah (d. 146/763–4), each 
of whom was alone in transmitting from a group of Successors. It is the case 
also for Mālik ibn Anas (who was alone in transmitting from almost ten of 
the shaykhs of Medina), Sufyān al-Thawrī (who was alone in transmitting 

 108 ] 
Ali Aghaei
from more than ten shaykhs) and Shuʿbah ibn al-Ḥajjāj (who was alone in 
transmitting from around thirty shaykhs).92 Al-Ḥākim, in the last part of his 
book, gives a detailed list of the well-known transmitters from the generation 
of the Successors and the Successors of the Successors from different regions 
of the Muslim world, whose isolated transmissions were regarded as accept-
able (maqbūl).93
Although the word madār was not frequently used as a technical term 
during the first Islamic centuries, in the fourth and fifth centuries it became 
very common among hadith scholars and critics. An outstanding application 
of this term can be seen in ʿilal books such as Ibn ʿAdī’s al-Kāmil fī ḍuʿafāʾ 
al-rijāl and al-Dāraquṭnī’s al-ʿIlal al-wāridah fī al-aḥādīth al-nabawīyah. Ibn ʿAdī 
and al-Dāraquṭnī use this term in two different contexts.
1. Sometimes, they call a transmitter the madār of a prophetic hadith; that 
is, the person to whom the various lines of transmission go back. For 
instance:
• Saʿd ibn Saʿīd ibn Qays al-Anṣārī (d. 141/758–9) is regarded as 
the madār of two prophetic hadiths.94 The first one is transmitted 
from ʿUmar ibn Thābit al-Anṣārī from Abū Ayyūb al-Anṣārī,95 the 
second from ʿAmrah (or ʿUrwah ibn al-Zubayr?) from ʿĀʾishah.96
• ʿUthmān ibn ʿAṭāʾ al-Khurāsānī (d. 151/768–9) is considered 
the madār of the hadith ascribed to Dhū al-Aṣābiʿ al-Juhanī, a 
Companion of the Prophet, regarding Jerusalem.97
2. In criticising some isnāds of a prophetic hadith that do not have a madār, 
they sometimes compare those isnāds with others that do have a madār 
and hence mention their defects. In other words, relying on the repu-
tation of the hadith through the madār’s narration, they criticise other 
lines of transmission. For example:
• Ḥasan ibn Yazīd al-Kūfī transmits a prophetic hadith with the 
following isnād: al-Suddī < Aws ibn Ḍamʿaj al-Ḥaḍramī < Ibn 
Masʿūd. Ibn ʿAdī assumes that this transmission line is not reli-
able because the madār of this hadith is Ismāʿīl ibn Rajāʾ al-Zabīdī, 
who related it from al-Ḥaḍramī from Ibn Masʿūd.98
• Regarding the different isnāds that are mentioned for the hadith 
of laughter during the prayer, Ibn ʿAdī says, ‘They [i.e., al-Ḥasan 
al-Baṣrī, Qatādah, Ibrāhīm al-Nakhaʿī, and al-Zuhrī] have 
transmitted this hadith, either as mursal or muttaṣil (uninter-
rupted), while their madār and their reference all go back to 
Abū al-ʿĀliyah.’ He then analyses the mentioned isnāds in detail 
and thence concludes, ‘This is his hadith [i.e., Abū al-ʿĀliyah’s], 
known through him.’99
• Al-Dāraquṭnī regards Bakr ibn ʿAbd Allāh al-Muzanī as the 
madār of a hadith transmitted from al-Mughīrah ibn Shuʿbah 
from the Prophet. He considers erroneous other isnāds of this 
hadith, in which instead of Bakr other transmitters like Abū 

  
The Common Link  
[ 109
ʿUthmān al-Nahdī, Anas, and Ḥumayd al-Ṭawīl narrated from 
al-Mughīrah, and states that the madār of this hadith is Bakr.100
 
Another example of the use of the term madār is found in al-Ḥākim’s al-
Mustadrak ʿalá al-Ṣaḥīḥayn. In this book, he compiles the hadiths that, based 
on the principles of al-Bukhārī and Muslim, should be considered sound 
(ṣaḥīḥ), although they are not included by the shaykhayn, meaning al-Bukhārī 
and Muslim, in their hadith collections. In explaining the absence of these 
hadiths in their collections, he makes use of the term madār. As an example, 
he brings up a prophetic hadith on the recitation of the Qurʾān narrated by 
ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib and labels its isnād as ṣaḥīḥ. He then states, ‘Neither of the 
shaykhayn relied on ʿAbd Allāh ibn Salamah as a proof, whereas he is not 
disparaged, and the madār of this hadith is upon him.’101
In later hadith works, the term madār is used in the context of hadith 
classification. Since the term madār per se indicates neither the discrediting 
(al-jarḥ) nor the accrediting of transmitters (al-taʿdīl), it is used in combina-
tion with other technical terms, often regarding the discrediting – and in 
some limited cases, regarding the accrediting – of transmitters, so that the 
qualification of the transmitter, and as a result the status of the hadith, can be 
determined. Therefore, as Özkan correctly recognised, the term madār, in the 
context of hadith criticism, is considered ‘a crucial point’ of the isnād; that is, 
a transmitter in the isnād on whose qualification the soundness or weakness 
of the hadith relies.102 This use of the term is especially evident in al-Sunan 
of al-Bayhaqī (d. 458/1066) and al-Istidhkār and al-Tamhīd of Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr 
(d. 463/1071); of each some examples are mentioned:
• Abān ibn Abī ʿAyyāsh is regarded as the madār of a hadith on ‘qunūt 
al-witr qabla al-rukūʿ’ (special invocation of the witr prayer before the 
bowing) and it is said that Abān is matrūk (abandoned).103
• The madārs of a hadith about intentional murder with a sword are Jābir 
ibn Yazīd al-Juʿfī and al-Qays ibn Rabīʿ, whose hadiths are not relied 
on as proof (lā yuḥtajju bihimā).104
• Abū Qudāmah Ḥārith ibn ʿUbayd al-Iyādī is regarded as the madār of 
a hadith about sujūd al-mufaṣṣalāt (prostrations called for in connection 
with late chapters of the Qurʾān), who was discredited by Yaḥyá ibn 
Maʿīn (ḍaʿʿafahū).105
• It is stated that the hadith about warranting the debt of a dead man by 
ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib that ʿAṭīyah ibn Saʿd al-ʿAwfī transmitted from Abū 
Saʿīd al-Khudrī revolves around ʿUbayd Allāh ibn Walīd al-Waṣṣāfī, 
who is very weak (ḍaʿīf jiddan).106
• The hadith of killing believers as punishment for killing unbelievers is 
regarded as weak because it revolves around Ibrāhīm ibn Abī Yaḥyá, 
who is not reliable (laysa lahū wajh).107
• The hadith lā nadhra fī maʿṣiyatin wa-kaffāratuhū kaffāratu yamīn 
(‘there is no vow to commit a sin and its atonement is that of an 

 110 ] 
Ali Aghaei
oath’) is transmitted by ʿImrān ibn Ḥuṣayn as well as ʿĀʾīshah (or 
Abū Hurayrah?); the madār of the first narration is considered to be 
Muḥammad ibn al-Zubayr al-Ḥanẓalī108 and that of the second one 
is Sulaymān ibn Arqam.109 Both transmitters are weak and there-
fore the hadith scholars regard Muḥammad’s hadiths as munkar and 
Sulaymān’s as matrūk.
• ʿĀṣim ibn ʿUmar ibn Qatādah, who is seen as the madār of a hadith 
narrated by Rāfiʿ ibn Khadīj from the Prophet, is weak (laysa bi-qawī).110
By investigating different uses of the term madār, one may clarify its rela-
tion to the terms tafarrud/infirād becomes apparent as well. These two terms 
are sometimes used together. For example, Zayd ibn al-Ḥawārī al-ʿAmmī is 
considered the madār of a hadith on the virtue of repeating one’s ablutions 
and it is said that he is alone in transmitting this hadith.111 It is often the case 
that the tafarrud/infirād of a madār in the transmission of a hadith is men-
tioned implicitly. For example, ʿAbd al-Karīm ibn Abī al-Mukhāriq is cited 
as the madār of a hadith about ‘the meat of animals’ and it is underlined that 
aside from him no one else transmitted this hadith (laysa yarwīhi ghayruhū).112 
One can also add, to the already mentioned examples, many cases in which 
the transmitter is described as being alone (munfarid/mutafarrid) in transmit-
ting the hadith, without being labelled madār.113
In later times, the diverse and widespread use of the term madār is 
seen in hadith commentaries by well-known scholars like al-Nawawī 
(d. 676/1277),114 Ibn al-Turkumānī (d. 750/1349),115 al-Zaylaʿī (d. 762/1360),116 
Ibn al-Mulaqqin (d. 804/1401),117 al-Haythamī (d. 807/1405),118 al-Būṣīrī 
(d. 840/1436),119 Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī (d. 852/1449)120 and al-ʿAynī (d. 
855/1451).121 Furthermore, during this time there was an attempt to moder-
ate the critical approach of the early hadith scholars and critics about the 
madārs and their hadiths. While in the early hadith literature the term madār 
had a mainly negative connotation in regard to the transmitter and to the 
hadith transmitted by him, the later hadith commentators, by collecting 
different versions of the hadith, tried to disassociate the madār from tafar-
rud and hence to promote the quality of his hadith. Therefore, although a 
transmitter who was considered weak by the early hadith scholars would be 
regarded as ‘the madār of the hadith’, it is also stated that he is not the only 
one who transmitted the hadith; that it was also transmitted by others, who 
are regarded as reliable. In other words, later commentators sought to find 
one or more mutābiʿs or shāhids for any fard hadith. Consider the following 
instances:
• Ibn al-Turkumānī regarded al-Aʿmash’s version of the hadith on qunūt 
al-witr qabla al-rukūʿ as a mutābiʿ for Abān ibn Abī ʿAyyāsh’s one, 
stating that the transmitters of this version are all reliable.122 By con-
trast, al-Bayhaqī had already considered Abān the madār of the hadith 
and hence al-Aʿmash’s one was invalid.123

  
The Common Link  
[ 111
• Al-Būṣīrī regarded the madār of a hadith by ʿAbd Allāh ibn Masʿūd 
from Ibrāhīm ibn Muslim al-Hajarī as weak, yet he mentions that it 
was not only Ibrāhīm who transmitted this hadith, for it had a mutābiʿ; 
besides, a shāhid can also be found in Muslim’s collection.124
• Al-Būṣīrī regarded ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Ziyād al-Ifrīqī as the madār of 
the hadith of Abū Ayyūb on ‘the claim of a Muslim on a Muslim’,125 
who was regarded as weak by early hadith scholars and stringent critics 
like Ibn Ḥanbal, Ibn Maʿīn, al-Tirmidhī and al-Nasāʾī. Nevertheless, 
al-Būṣīrī stresses that he was not alone in transmitting this hadith 
and that a shāhid for this hadith was transmitted by Muslim from Abū 
Hurayrah.126
• Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī transmitted a hadith from Ibn ʿAbbās about 
‘three things that the Prophet made obligatory upon himself and 
recommended for others’. The madār of this hadith is Abū Janāb 
al-Kalbī, who used to tamper with isnāds (mudallis) and was also a 
weak transmitter, whose hadiths were regarded as weak by early 
hadith scholars. Ibn Ḥajar added, ‘It is not just Abū Janāb who trans-
mitted it: this hadith has two mutābiʿs, though whose transmitters 
are weak.’127
• Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr regarded ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Isḥāq al-Wāsiṭī as the 
madār of the hadith on the issue that the sacred months are always 
thirty days and considered him weak.128 By contrast, al-ʿAynī did not 
accept his being a madār because this hadith has a mutābiʿ whose trans-
mitters in the isnād are all reliable.129
• Al-Bayhaqī regarded al-Haramī ibn ʿAbd Allāh as the madār of 
Khuzaymah ibn Thābit al-Anṣārī’s hadith from the Prophet on ‘anal 
intercourse with women’ and hence considered erroneous ʿUmāra 
ibn Khuzaymah’s narration from his father, which is transmitted only 
through Ibn ʿUyaynah.130 Ibn al-Turkumānī objects to the idea of con-
sidering al-Haramī as madār and refers as proof to other versions that 
other transmitters related from Khuzaymah, although some of them 
had been already mentioned by al-Bayhaqī himself.131
Sometimes, the later hadith commentators would not find it sufficient 
to cite only the mutābiʿ or shāhid, but would also find another madār for the 
hadith. An example is the hadith of man ṣāma Ramaḍān wa-sittan min Shawwāl 
(‘whoever fasts Ramadan and six days of Shawwāl’).132 Ibn ʿAdī identified 
Saʿd ibn Saʿīd ibn Qays al-Anṣārī as the madār of this hadith, which was 
narrated by Abū Ayyūb al-Anṣārī. To the contrary, by mentioning a similar 
hadith by Jābir ibn ʿAbd Allāh al-Anṣārī, al-Būṣīrī indicated ʿAmr ibn Jābir 
al-Ḥaḍramī as the madār of this hadith and cited Abū Ayyūb’s hadith as its 
shāhid.133 Al-Būṣīrī, indeed, provided for Saʿd’s hadith not just one hadith as 
shāhid but a collection of shawāhid which themselves have an independent 
madār; that is, Abū Ayyūb.

 112 ] 
Ali Aghaei
The madārs’ Generation and the Validity of their Isolated Hadiths
By reviewing the names of the transmitters who, in the hadith literature, 
are listed under titles such as ‘the authorities around whom isnāds revolve’ 
or ‘the madārs of the hadiths’, it becomes clear that the major part of these 
transmitters belongs to the young Successors’ generation (ṣighār al-tābiʿīn) 
or the generation after the Successors (atbāʿ al-tābiʿīn).134 To explain this, 
one needs to take into consideration the origin and development of the 
isnād system in the first two centuries. The isnād ‘as an institution’ and ‘as 
a compulsory authentication device’ and its spread amongst the transmit-
ters originated in the late seventies of the first century ah/second half of 
the seventh century ce, and then the various centres of learning adopted 
the isnād at varying rates. That means that the people became accustomed 
to giving authorities for their reports at the earliest by the end of the first/
seventh century or at the beginning of the second/eighth century, when the 
Successors flourished.135 It is only after this period, that is, around the second 
half of the second/eighth century, that hadith transmission became wide-
spread and the isnād investigation grew common. Thereafter, the attempt to 
compile the hadiths and their transmission lines became popular amongst 
the traditionists to the extent that one would even travel to other lands, near 
and far afield, in order to hear hadiths and acquire elevated isnāds (al-isnād 
al-ʿālī).136 It is obvious that during this time, hadiths would be transmitted 
isolated (mutafarrid) and the later hadith scholars would see no defect in 
them. It is also asserted that the tafarrud of the transmitters in this period is 
admissible, because they were the immediate conveyers of the prophetic tra-
dition (al-sunnah al-nabawīyah).137 After the formation of the circles of learn-
ing hadiths and the prevalence of hadith teaching and learning in the public 
assemblies, transmission lines of hadiths also increased in number, and the 
hadith scholars’ attempt was then to compile the different transmission lines. 
From this time on, the hadith scholars decided to detect fards and gharībs and 
to compensate for their taffarud and gharābah through finding mutābiʿāt and 
shawāhid. Al-Dhahabī’s statement in this regard is insightful. According to 
him, accepting a fard depends on the level to which the transmitter belongs:
If one of the Successors were alone in transmitting, his hadith would be regarded 
as ṣaḥīḥ. If the transmitter belonged to the generation after the Successors, his 
hadith would be labelled ṣaḥīḥ gharīb. And if he were to be one of the students 
of the Successors of the Successors, his hadith would be called gharīb and fard. 
However, the tafarrud of the last group is very rare.138
He, of course, adds that some would be more cautious in accepting the tafar-
rud of the generation of the Successors of the Successors and would also 
occasionally avoid calling them ṣaḥīḥ and gharīb simultaneously. Rather, 
some scholars regarded their fards – like those of Hushaym ibn Bashīr and 
Ḥafṣ ibn Ghiyāth (d. 194/809–10) – as munkar.139 Al-Dhahabī also confirms 

  
The Common Link  
[ 113
that tafarrud seems implausible by the transmitters of the generation after the 
Successors of the Successors and, in his opinion, there is almost a consensus 
that the last group’s fards are considered munkar.140
This strict attitude towards the transmitters of the generation after the 
Successors is also found in the words of the early hadith scholars. In response 
to the question, ‘Whose transmission is not acceptable?’ Shuʿbah ibn al-Ḥajjāj 
maintained, ‘The one who transmitted from well-known people what others 
did not know.’141 Muslim highlights this principle in the introduction to 
his Ṣaḥīḥ as well as in his Kitāb al-Tamyīz. According to him, if a transmit-
ter related a hadith from well-known people like al-Zuhrī and Hishām ibn 
ʿUrwah, whose hadiths are famous amongst the traditionists on account of 
the high number of their students and the people who transmit from them, 
that was nevertheless unknown to their students (lā yaʿrifuhū aḥadun min 
aṣḥābihimā), then the hadith of this person cannot be accepted.142 Perhaps the 
statement by Abū Dāwūd al-Sijistānī (d. 275/889) could also be put in the 
same context, when he states, ‘The gharīb cannot be taken as a proof, even if 
someone like Mālik ibn Anas or Yaḥyá ibn Saʿīd al-Anṣārī has transmitted it 
and the great authorities and reliable transmitters related.’143 The cases that 
al-Ḥākim includes in the second category of the fard are also of this kind: ‘The 
hadith that some person alone transmitted from the hadith authorities.’144 He 
cites some examples of this category and at the end emphasises that exam-
ples of it are many. The instances given by him match exactly the already 
mentioned definition of al-fard al-muṭlaq.145 This category also accords with 
the definition provided by Ibn Mandah for the gharīb. According to him, ‘The 
gharīb is an isolated hadith transmitted isolated from the authorities, such as 
al-Zuhrī and Qatādah, whose hadiths would be compiled.’146
The common ground in these statements is that when an isolated hadith 
is transmitted from the hadith authorities, considering the high number 
of their students and popularity of their hadiths, one should doubt the 
authenticity and validity of such a transmission. This implies that from the 
transmitters who were not of that high status and popularity or did not 
have large teaching circles to disseminate their hadiths so widely one can 
expect isolated hadiths. It means that the tafarrud of the common links – who 
belong to the generation of the young Successors or a generation after that 
– in transmitting the hadiths does not seem implausible. However, for later 
generations, it is expected that their hadiths would be transmitted through 
several transmission lines, since the students of the common links, that is, 
the partial common links, would not encounter the restrictions of the former 
generations and were living at a time when the hadith transmission system 
was well organised. This idea fits well with Juynboll’s view: tafarrud at the 
level of the ‘common links’ and several transmission lines at the later levels 
of the ‘partial common links’. It also confirms Juynboll’s condition for the 
historicity of a common link, while he requires at least three (or two, in his 
later works) partial common links to substantiate the historicity of an isnād 
bundle. On the contrary, various single strands from the transmitters of a 

 114 ] 
Ali Aghaei
particular time when hadith teaching and learning had sufficiently grown 
and the isnād system had been stabilised might only make an unhistorical 
‘spider’.147
The Relation between the Terms madār and Common Link
The relationship between the terms gharīb, tafarrud/infirād and madār has 
become apparent. It has also been clarified that there is a firm association 
between what the Western scholars regard as the common link and these 
terms, especially the madār. Perhaps the most significant similarity between 
the terms common link and madār is found in the definition given for them, 
which is confirmed by the given examples. By gathering various isnāds found 
in the hadith collections in support of one particular hadith and putting them 
together – especially when they are incorporated in a visual diagram, one 
renders the common link or madār visible. As Juynboll observes, ‘from the 
bottom up one finds first a single row or strand of mostly three, four or more 
names beginning with the Prophet or another ancient authority. Where the 
names start fanning out in branches, we find the common link’,148 ‘. . . who 
hears something from (seldom more than) one authority and passes it on to 
a number of pupils, most of whom pass it on in their turn to two or more of 
their pupils.’149
Despite this principle commonality, the Muslim hadith scholars’ under-
standing of the common link phenomenon fundamentally differs from that 
of the Western scholars, something which goes back to differences between 
the Western and Islamic approaches. The Muslim scholars’ primary concern 
has always been the issue of authority (ḥujjīyah), because hadith has always 
been regarded as one of the main religious sources, be it for fiqh (law), kalām 
(theology) or tafsīr (Qurʾānic exegesis). Western scholars study hadith from 
a different perspective. In their view, the authenticity (aṣālah) of hadith, 
not its authority, is of greater significance.150 Hence, it is possible to find a 
hadith that is regarded as weak or fictitious by Muslim scholars, whereas 
for Western scholars it would contain valuable information regarding the 
particular historical time and age when the hadith was forged. Conversely, 
a hadith that Muslim scholars would take as proof for a legal decision or 
as support for a theological viewpoint or exegetical interpretation would 
not necessarily be regarded by Western scholars as historically reliable and 
authentic. Whereas Western scholars, especially Schacht and Juynboll, take 
the tafarrud of the madār/the common link as noticeable historical evidence 
to establish the historical origin and development of a hadith, early Muslim 
hadith scholars and critics did not take the tafarrud of the transmitter nec-
essarily but as an indicator of the weakness of the hadith, rather as a sign 
signalling a defect in its transmission and would, therefore, examine the 
accuracy of its transmission. Considering the evidence of reliability and 
the generation to which the madār and his transmitter(s) belong, as well as 
the fame (shuhrah) of the matn of the hadith transmitted by the madār and 

  
The Common Link  
[ 115
its agreement or disagreement with other well-known hadiths, they would 
decide on the soundness or weakness and finally on the authority of the 
hadith.
Referring to this very fact, Özkan concludes that the terms common link 
and madār are not equivalent:
The common link and madār may resemble one another in some respects, and 
there may be a vague structural similarity between them, but both have different 
contexts, occurrences, and usages, as well as different interpretations, implica-
tions and consequences . . . Each term emerged in different circumstances (time 
and place) and belongs to a different terminological structure.151
There is no doubt that these two terms come from different scientific and cul-
tural contexts. One should consider, however, that both terms are address-
ing one and the same phenomenon. Pace Özkan, to relate these two different 
contexts to each other and to provide evidence from both paradigms to gain 
a better understanding of the very phenomenon is not only correct but also 
highly desirable.
Özkan’s arguments regarding his criticism of the equivalence of the terms 
madār and common link are far from convincing. On the strength of the infor-
mation presented in the earlier parts of the present chapter, I argue briefly 
against his points of objection. Concerning his first objection, that finding 
some madārs among the generation of the Companions or the old Successors 
contradicts the concept of the common link, one should distinguish between 
the existence of such cases in the hadith literature and the question of how 
to interpret the evidence. Juynboll does not claim that by gathering the 
isnāds of hadiths, common links can never be found in those generations. 
He rather holds that such common links are not real, and he labels them 
‘seeming common links’.152 Of course, as Özkan himself mentions,153 not all 
scholars who use the common-link phenomenon for dating hadiths agree 
with Juynboll’s interpretation.154 However, they also do not agree among 
themselves regarding the issue of how one could explain the appearance of a 
common link on the level of the Companions in a way that would be compat-
ible with the historical facts of the first century.155
The argument just mentioned holds true as well for Özkan’s second objec-
tion; that is, the problem of the plurality of the madārs in one and the same 
hadith. We should once again differentiate between the phenomenon itself 
and the interpretation thereof. According to Juynboll’s interpretation, if a real 
common link had to exist, there would not be more than one, and that too 
could be identified through differentiating between the isnāds containing the 
‘partial common links’ and the ‘single strands’. According to another inter-
pretation of the common link, the existence of two or more common links in 
one and the same generation implies the existence of a common source, from 
whom they all received the hadith. The accuracy of this claim can be verified 
by comparing the mutūn of the different versions of the hadiths transmitted 

 116 ] 
Ali Aghaei
from each of these common links and examining the correlation between 
these mutūn and their isnāds.156
Finally, concerning the claim that the madār is not an equivalent of tafar-
rud, it should be pointed out that, apart from the inconsistencies in Özkan’s 
examples,157 he fails to consider the discrepancies in the application of the 
term madār by early and late hadith scholars. As shown in the preceding sec-
tions, early hadith scholars’ usage of the term madār implicitly (or sometimes 
explicitly) indicates the tafarrud of the transmitter in relating the hadith as 
well. Many attempts, however, were made by later hadith scholars to modify 
the rigorous approach of early hadith scholars and critics to the madārs and 
the hadiths transmitted by them. While in the early literature, the term madār 
was mainly used with a negative connotation about the transmitter and his 
hadith, later hadith commentators, through collecting different versions of 
the hadith and finding mutābiʿāt or shawāhid for his fard, tried to prevent 
the madār from being discredited because of his tafarrud and to improve the 
quality of his hadith.158
Apart from these shortcomings, the most serious problem in Özkan’s 
study is that he confines the interpretation of the common link to Schacht 
and Juynboll’s,159 whereas there are other explanations for this phenom-
enon. Schacht, and following him Juynboll, regarded the common link (or a 
person who used his name) as the one who put into circulation the hadith 
text and the single strand from the common link to the Prophet as ‘ficti-
tious’, and thus, the time of the common link as the terminus post quem for 
the emergence of the hadith.160 Others have considered the common link as 
the outcome of forgeries and fabrications devised in the following genera-
tions in isnāds of hadiths and hence questioned its validity for the purposes 
of dating hadiths.161 There is yet a third group of scholars who regard the 
two previous interpretations as the result of hasty generalisations and con-
sider the common link to be the ‘early systematic collectors’ of the hadiths, 
who sought to compile the knowledge of preceding generations and to dis-
seminate them to their students. Through this interpretation, one could then 
better explain the existence of a single strand before and several branches 
after the common link.162 This interpretation could also find support among 
the works of the early traditionists and hadith critics. As already mentioned, 
the famous transmitters of different hadith centres, who lived at the end 
of the first/seventh century and the beginning of the second/eighth century, 
are called madārs because they are considered to be responsible for the dis-
semination of hadiths – which they were mostly alone in transmitting – in 
their locales whose isnāds go back to them. Upon this very consideration, 
their isolated transmission seems not a defect to their hadiths and therefore 
was accepted by hadith scholars in the third and fourth/ninth and tenth 
centuries. Considering this interpretation of the common-link phenomenon 
can lead to a better understanding of the relation between the common link 
and the Muslims’ hadith terminology, especially its use by early hadith 
scholars.

  
The Common Link  
[ 117
Notes
 
*. Special thanks go to my colleagues Andreas Ismail Mohr, Pavel Pavlovich and 
Andreas Görke for their critical reading and feedback on the final version of this 
study. I am grateful to Devin Stewart for proofreading the text and for his kind 
help with polishing my English.
 1. Joseph Schacht, The Origins of Muhammadan Jurisprudence (Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1950), 163–79.
 2. Schacht, Origins of Muhammadan Jurisprudence, 171.
 3. Schacht, Origins of Muhammadan Jurisprudence, 172.
 4. See Schacht, Origins of Muhammadan Jurisprudence, 175–6.
 5. For a general review of the issue, see Harald Motzki, ‘Dating Muslim Traditions: 
a Survey’, Arabica 52(2) (2005): 204–53, at 219–42.
 6. Schacht, Origins of Muhammadan Jurisprudence, 172.
 7. For example, Schacht, Origins of Muhammadan Jurisprudence, 173, 181–2.
 8. Halit Ozkan (sic, hereafter referred to as Özkan), ‘The Common Link and its 
Relation to the Madār’, Islamic Law and Society 11(1) (2004): 42–77, at 44, n. 14.
 9. Schacht, Origins of Muhammadan Jurisprudence, 171.
 10. G. H. A. Juynboll, Muslim Tradition: Studies in Chronology, Provenance and 
Authorship of Early Ḥadīth (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983), 216.
 11. See G. H. A. Juynboll, Studies on the Origins and Uses of Islamic Ḥadīth (Aldershot: 
Variorum, 1996).
 12. For example, see G. H. A. Juynboll, ‘The Role of Non-Arabs, the Mawālī, in the 
Early Development of Muslim Ḥadīth’, Le Muséon 118 (2005): 355–86, at 164.
 13. See G. H. A. Juynboll, ‘Some Isnād-Analytical Methods Illustrated on the Basis 
of Several Woman-Demeaning Sayings from Ḥadīth Literature’, Al-Qanṭara 10 
(1989): 343–83, at 214–15; G. H. A. Juynboll, ‘Nāfiʿ, the Mawlā of Ibn ʿUmar, and 
His Position in Muslim Ḥadīth Literature’, Der Islam 70 (1993): 207–44, at 214–15.
 14. G. H. A. Juynboll, ‘(Re)appraisal of Some Technical Terms in Ḥadīth Science’, 
Islamic Law and Society 8 (2001): 303–49, at 307, 311.
 15. For instance, see Juynboll, ‘(Re)appraisal of Some Technical Terms’, 311–12.
 16. Juynboll, ‘(Re)appraisal of Some Technical Terms, 315–19.
 17. Özkan, ‘Common Link and its Relation to the Madār’, 42.
 18. Özkan, ‘Common Link and its Relation to the Madār’, 52–4.
 19. Özkan, ‘Common Link and its Relation to the Madār’, 51, citing G. H. A. 
Juynboll, ‘Some Notes on Islam’s First fuqahā’’, Arabica 39 (1992): 287–314, at 
295–6.
 20. Özkan, ‘Common Link and its Relation to the Madār’, 52.
 21. Özkan, ‘Common Link and its Relation to the Madār’, 55–60.
 22. Özkan, ‘Common Link and its Relation to the Madār’, 60.
 23. Özkan, ‘Common Link and its Relation to the Madār’, 64. ‘In the ḥadīth litera-
ture,’ he himself concedes, ‘we find cases in which the two terms appear to have 
the same meaning’, but he considers this true ‘only on occasion, as in some 
examples found in Ibn Ḥajar’, which he interestingly uses in his argument 
against Juynboll; see ibid., 55–7.

 118 ] 
Ali Aghaei
 24. Özkan, ‘Common Link and its Relation to the Madār’, 64.
 25. Regarding this issue, two theses have been published: one on the term madār 
and its application in hadith works; the other on the notion of tafarrud and 
the circumstances of its being accepted or refused by Muslim hadith schol-
ars. While in these two books a plethora of materials has been gathered from 
hadith literature, both authors fail to present consistent and intelligible pic-
tures of the phenomena. I have to acknowledge, however, that I have much 
benefited from their works, particularly in preparing the raw material for 
the present study. See Muḥammad Mujīr al-Khaṭīb al-Ḥasanī, Maʿrifat madār 
al-isnād wa-bayān makānatihī fī ʿilm ʿilal al-ḥadīth, 2 vols (Riyadh: Dār al-Maymān, 
1428/2007), and ʿAbd al-Jawād al-Ḥamām, al-Tafarrud fī riwāyat al-ḥadīth wa-
manhaj al-muḥaddithīn fī qabūlihī wa-raddih, Mashrūʿ miʾat risālah jāmiʿīyah 
sūrīyah, 13 (Damascus: Dār al-Nawādir, 1429/2008).
 26. Muḥammad ibn ʿĪsá al-Tirmidhī, al-Jāmiʿ al-kabīr, ed. Bashshār ʿAwwād Maʿrūf, 
6 vols (Beirut: Dār al-Gharb al-Islāmī, 1996), 6:251–2, also 3:147–8, al-aṭʿimah 13, 
bāb mā jāʾa fī al-dhakāh fī al-ḥalq wa-l-labbah, No. 1481; see also Yūsuf ibn ʿAbd 
al-Raḥmān al-Mizzī, Tuḥfat al-ashrāf bi-maʿrifat al-aṭrāf, ed. ʿAbd al-Ṣamad Sharaf 
al-Dīn, 14 vols (Bhiwandi: al-Dār al-Qayyimah, 1384–1403/1965–82), 11:222–3, 
No. 15694; see also G. H. A. Juynboll, Encyclopedia of Canonical Ḥadīth (Leiden: 
Brill, 2007; hereafter ECḤ), 164.
 27. Al-Tirmidhī, Jāmiʿ, 6:252; see also 2:517–18, al-buyūʿ 20, bāb mā jāʾa fī karāhiyat 
bayʿ al-walāʾ wa-hibatih, No. 1236, and 4:5–6, al-walāʾ wa-l-hibah 2, bāb mā jāʾa fī 
al-nahy ʿan bayʿ al-walāʾ wa-ʿan hibatih, No. 2126, where he considers the hadith 
to be ḥasan ṣaḥīḥ; see also al-Mizzī, 5:447, No. 7132, 5:449–50, No. 7150, 5:453, No. 
7171, 5:454, No. 7186, 5:455, No. 7189, 5:456, No. 7199, 5:460, No. 7223, 5:464, No. 
7250; see also Juynboll, ECḤ, 5.
 28. Muslim ibn al-Ḥajjāj al-Qushayrī, al-Jāmiʿ al-ṣaḥīḥ, 8 vols ([Istanbul]: al-Maṭbaʿah 
al-ʿĀmirah, 1330–4), 4:216, al-ʿitq 4, bāb al-nahy ʿan bayʿ al-walāʾ, No. 1506: ‘al-nās 
kulluhum ʿiyāl ʿalá ʿAbd Allāh ibn Dīnār fī hādhā al-ḥadīth’. For a detailed discus-
sion of this hadith, see Schacht, Origins of Muhammadan Jurisprudence, 173–4; 
M. Mustafa Al-Azami, On Schacht’s Origins of Muhammadan Jurisprudence 
(Riyadh: King Saud University, 1985; repr. Oxford: Oxford Centre for Islamic 
Studies, 1996), 200–5.
 29. Al-Tirmidhī, Jāmiʿ, 6:252–3. For a comprehensive study of addition (ziyādah) in 
hadith and analysis of Muslim hadith scholars and critics’ approach towards this 
phenomenon, see Jonathan A. C. Brown, ‘Critical Rigor vs. Juridical Pragmatism: 
How Legal Theorists and Ḥadīth Scholars Approached the Backgrowth of Isnāds 
in the Genre of ʿIlal al-Ḥadīth’, Islamic Law and Society 14(1) (2007): 1–41.
 30. Al-Tirmidhī, Jāmiʿ, 2:54–5, al-zakāh 35, bāb mā jāʾa fī ṣadaqat al-fiṭr, No. 676, 6:253. 
Bashshār ʿAwwād Maʿrūf, the editor of al-Tirmidhī’s collection, adds in a note 
that Mālik is not the only one who narrated this addition but that this version 
of the hadith has several mutābiʿs. For a detailed analysis of this tradition 
transmitted through Mālik < Nāfiʿ < Ibn ʿUmar and its relation to the common-
link phenomenon, see Juynboll, ‘Nāfiʿ, the Mawlā of Ibn ʿUmar’, 207–44. For a 
critique of Juynboll’s article, see Harald Motzki, ‘Quo vadis Ḥadīṯ-Forschung? 

  
The Common Link  
[ 119
Eine kritische Untersuchung G. H. A. Juynboll: “Nāfiʿ, the Mawlā of Ibn ʿUmar, 
and His Position in Muslim Ḥadīth Literature”’, Der Islam 73(1) (1996): 40–80, 
and 73(2) (1996): 193–231; English version ‘Whither Ḥadīth Studies?’, trans. 
Frank Griffel, in Harold Motzki with Nicolet Boekhoff-van der Voort and Sean 
Anthony, Analysing Muslim Traditions: Studies in Legal, Exegetical and Maghāzī 
Ḥadīth, Islamic History and Civilization, Studies and Texts, 78 (Leiden: Brill, 
2010), 47–124.
 31. For other versions of the hadith, see al-Mizzī, Tuḥfah 2:305, No. 2753: Jābir ibn 
ʿAbd Allāh al-Anṣārī, 6:19, No. 7357, 6:45, No. 7445, 6:79, No. 7576, 6:131, No. 
7864, 6:147, No. 7950, 6:159, No. 8046, 6:176, No. 8156, 6:221, No. 8391, 6:249–50, 
No. 8517: ʿAbd Allāh ibn ʿUmar, 9:416, No. 12739, 10:85–6, No. 13412, 10:196, 
No. 13847: Abū Hurayrah. See also Juynboll, ECḤ, 553–4.
 32. Al-Tirmidhī, Jāmiʿ, 6:253–4; cf. al-Mizzī, 6:440–1, No. 9050 (Abū Mūsá’s version). 
For more examples, see al-Tirmidhī, Jāmiʿ, 6:254–7.
 33. Nūr al-Dīn ʿItr, Manhaj al-naqd fī ʿulūm al-ḥadīth (Damascus: Dār al-Fikr, 
1399/1979), 398. What al-Ḥākim al-Naysābūrī mentions in his categorisa-
tion of gharīb hadiths is compatible with the two first categories presented by 
al-Tirmidhī. See Muḥammad ibn ʿAbd Allāh al-Ḥākim al-Naysābūrī, Kitāb 
Maʿrifat ʿulūm al-ḥadīth, ed. Muʿaẓẓam Ḥusayn (Cairo: Dār al-Kutub al-Miṣrīyah, 
1356/1937), 94–6.
 34. In the same sense, other expressions have been used such as ‘mashhūr ʿinda ahli 
‘l-ʿilm’ and ‘rawá ʿanhu ghayru wāḥidin mina ‘l-aʾimmah/ahli l-ʿilm’.
 35. Here, I have adopted ʿItr’s general categorisation of the gharīb: (1) al-gharīb 
matnan wa-isnādan, which is a hadith transmitted only through one strand; and 
(2) al-gharīb isnādan wa-lā matnan, which is a hadith whose matn is well-known 
for its transmission through various strands from one transmitter, while a 
version thereof is transmitted via a single strand from another one (aside from 
the well-known transmission line). According to him, other categories, such as 
‘al-gharīb matnan lā isnādan’, ‘al-gharīb baʿḍ al-matn’ and ‘al-gharīb baʿḍ al-sanad’, 
all may be referred to the first two categories (ʿItr, Manhaj, 397−9).
 36. See, for example, al-Tirmidhī, Jāmiʿ, 1:436, al-ṣalāh 187, bāb mā jāʾa fī al-ṣalāh ʿalá 
al-dābbah, No. 411; 1:556, al-ṣalāh 278, bāb mā jāʾa fī ṣalāt al-istisqāʾ, No. 556; 3:365, 
al-libās 28, bāb mā jāʾa fī al-qumuṣ, No. 1762; 3:427, al-aṭʿimah 41, bāb mā jāʾa fī 
al-tasmiyah, No. 1848; 3:517, al-birr wa-l-ṣilah 46, bāb mā jāʾa fī al-ṣidq wa-l-kadhib, 
No. 1972; 4:372, al-īmān 13, bāb mā jāʾa anna al-islām badaʾa gharīban, No. 2629; 
5:49, al-qirāʾāt 1, bāb fī fātiḥat al-kitāb, No. 2929; 5:174, tafsīr al-Qurʾān 10, bāb 
wa-min sūrat al-tawbah, No. 3096; 5:355, tafsīr al-Qurʾān 70, bāb wa-min sūrat al- 
muddaththir, No. 3327; 5:395, al-daʿawāt 11, bāb mā jāʾa fī rafʿ al-aydī, No. 2126.
 37. Yaḥyá ibn Maʿīn, Tārīkh Yaḥyá ibn Maʿīn: riwāyat al-ʿAbbās ibn Muḥammad 
al-Dūrī, ed. ʿAbd Allāh Aḥmad Ḥasan, 2 vols (Beirut: Dār al-Qalam, n.d.), 2:25. 
For another example, see ibid., 2:231, ‘hādhā gharīb laysa yuḥaddithu bihī illā …’
 38. Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn Ḥanbal, Kitāb al-ʿIlal wa-maʿrifat al-rijāl, ed. Waṣī 
Allāh ibn Muḥammad ʿAbbās (Beirut: al-Maktab al-Islāmī, 1408/1988), 2:277, 
‘lam nasmaʿhu min ghayri Hushaym ʿan Yaḥyá ibn Saʿīd.’ See, for another example, 
ibid., 3:91.

 120 ] 
Ali Aghaei
 39. Abū Aḥmad ʿAbd Allāh Ibn ʿAdī, al-Kāmil fī ḍuʿafāʾ al-rijāl, ed. Suhayl Zakkār 
and Yaḥyá Mukhtār Ghazzāwī, 7 vols (Beirut: Dār al-Fikr, 1405/1988), 1:26, ‘lā 
aʿlamu yarwīhi ghayru ʿAmr ibn Thābit’. For other examples, see ibid., 1:30, 40, 
355, 416 and passim. See also, for other expressions he used, 1:233, ‘mā aʿlamu 
lahū ṭarīqan ghayra hādhā’, 1:312, ‘lā yurwá illā min hādhā ’l-wajh’.
 40. ʿAlī ibn ʿUmar al-Dāraquṭnī, al-ʿIlal al-wāridah fī al-aḥādīth al-nabawīyah, ed. 
Maḥfūẓ al-Raḥmān al-Salafī, 11 vols (Riyadh: Dār Ṭaybah, 1405–16/1985–96), 
4:176, ‘huwa gharībun ʿani ‘l-Aʿmashi lā aʿlamu ḥaddatha bihī ʿani ‘l-Aʿmashi hākadhā 
ghayru Jarīr’. For other examples, see ibid., 5:248, ‘huwa gharībun ʿanhu tafar-
rada bihī Muḥammadu ‘bnu Jaʿfarini bni Abī Kathīrin ʿanhu’; 11:295, ‘gharībun ʿani 
’l-Thawrīyi tafarrada bihī ʿanh’.
 41. ‘Al-ḥadīthu ‘lladhī yanfaridu bihī baʿḍu ‘l-ruwāti yūṣafu bi-’l-gharīb’; ʿUthmān 
ibn ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn al-Ṣalāḥ, Muqaddimat Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ, ed. ʿĀʾishah ʿAbd 
al-Raḥmān Bint al-Shāṭiʾ (Cairo: Dār al-Maʿārif, [1990]), 456. See also Muḥyī 
al-Dīn Abū Zakarīyāʾ Yaḥyá ibn Sharaf al-Nawawī, al-Taqrīb wa-al-taysīr 
li-maʿrifat sunan al-bashīr al-nadhīr, ed. Muḥammad ʿUthmān al-Khisht (Beirut: 
Dār al-Kitāb al-ʿArabī, 1405/1985), 86; Badr al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm 
ibn Jamāʿah, al-Manhal al-rawī fī mukhtaṣar ʿulūm al-ḥadīth al-nabawī, ed. Muḥyī 
al-Dīn ʿAbd al-Raḥmān Ramaḍān (Damascus: Dār al-Fikr, 1406/1986), 55.
 42. ‘Al-gharīb: wa-huwa mā yatafarradu bi-riwāyatihī shakhṣun wāḥidun fī ayyi mawḍiʿin 
waqaʿa ‘l-tafarrudu bihī mina ‘l-sanad’; Shihāb al-Dīn Abu al-Faḍl Aḥmad b. ʿAlī 
Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī, Nuzhat al-naẓar fī tawḍīḥ Nukhbat al-fikar fī muṣṭalaḥ ahl 
al-athar, ed. ʿAbd Allāh ibn Ḍayf Allāh al-Ruḥaylī (Riyadh: [n.p.], 1422/2001), 
54. Since Ibn Ḥajar, hadith scholars have adopted the same definition; for 
instance, see ʿItr, Manhaj, 396, ‘huwa ’l-ḥadīthu ‘lladhī tafarrada bihī rāwīhi sawāʾun 
tafarrada bihī ʿan imāmin yujmaʿu ḥadīthuhū aw ʿan rāwin ghayri imām’.
 43. On the notion of ‘root (aṣl) of the isnād’, see below.
 44. Ibn Ḥajar, Nuzhat al-naẓar, 64–5.
 45. Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ, Muqaddimah, 257–8.
 46. For example, see al-Nawawī, Taqrīb, 43; Ibn Jamāʿah, Manhal, 51.
 47. Al-Ḥākim al-Naysābūrī, ʿUlūm al-ḥadīth, 96–102.
 48. For example, see Ibn Ḥajar, al-Nukat ʿalá Kitāb Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ, ed. Masʿūd ʿAbd 
al-Ḥamīd al-Saʿdanī and Muḥammad Fāris (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 
1414/1994), 291.
 49. ‘Al-ḥadīthu idhā lam tajmaʿ ṭuruqahū lam tafhamhu’; see Aḥmad ibn ʿAlī al-Khaṭīb 
al-Baghdādī, al-Jāmiʿ li-akhlāq al-rāwī wa-ādāb al-sāmiʿ, ed. Muḥammad ʿAjjāj 
al-Khaṭīb, 2 vols (Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Risālah, 1416/1996), 2:315.
 50. ‘Al-bābu idhā lam tujmaʿ ṭuruquhū lam yatabayyan khaṭaʾuhū’; al-Khaṭīb, Jāmiʿ, 
2:316. For a similar expression from Yaḥyá ibn Maʿīn, see Ibn Maʿīn, Tārīkh 
2:211, ‘law lam naktubi ‘l-ḥadītha min thalāthīna wajhan mā ʿaqalnāh’.
 51. In reference to this kind of investigation, the hadith critics used the cognate verbal 
form of the term iʿtibār (iʿtabara, yaʿtabiru); see, for example, Abū Jaʿfar Muḥammad 
ibn ʿAmr al-ʿUqaylī, Kitāb al-Ḍuʿafāʾ al-kabīr, ed. ʿAbd al-Muʿṭī Amīn Qalʿajī, 4 
vols (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 1404/1998), 1:144; ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn 
Abī Ḥātim Muḥammad al-Rāzī, Kitāb al-Jarḥ wa-l-taʿdīl, 9 vols (Hyderabad: Majlis 

  
The Common Link  
[ 121
Dāʾirat al-Maʿārif al-ʿUthmānīyah, 1360–72), 2:378; Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad Ibn 
Ḥibbān al-Bustī, Kitāb al-Thiqāt, ed. Muḥammad ʿAbd al-Muʿīd Khān, 9 vols 
(Hyderabad: Majlis Dārʾirat al-Maʿārif al-ʿUthmānīyah, 1393–1403/1973–83), 
4:336, 6:132, 7:343, 8:293, 492; Ibn ʿAdī, Kāmil, 2:63, 3:36, 4:82.
 52. Ibn Ḥibbān, Ṣaḥīḥ Ibn Ḥibbān bi-tartīb al-Amīr ʿAlāʾ al-Dīn ʿAlī al-Fārisī 
(d. 739/1338–9), ed. Shuʿayb al-Arnaʾūṭ, 18 vols (Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Risālah, 
1414/1993), 1:155. The English translation with some modification is adapted 
from Eerik Dickinson, The Development of Early Sunnite Ḥadīth Criticism: 
the Taqdima of Ibn Abī Ḥātim al-Rāzī (240/854–327/938), Islamic History and 
Civilization, Studies and Texts, 38 (Leiden: Brill, 2001), 89.
 53. For a detailed discussion on the methods used by early Sunnite hadith scholars 
for examination and authentication of hadiths, see Dickinson, Development of 
Early Sunnite Ḥadīth Criticism, 80–126.
 54. Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ, Muqaddimah, 247–8. For a detailed definition, see Abū al-Faḍl ʿAbd 
al-Raḥīm ibn Ḥusayn al-ʿIrāqī, Sharḥ al-tabṣirah wa-al-tadhkirah, ed. ʿAbd al-Laṭīf 
Hamīm and Māhir Yāsīn Faḥl (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 1423/2002), 
1:258. In the hadith collections one can find some cases in which the expres-
sion lā yutābaʿu ʿalayhi appears to indicate the isolation of a hadith; e.g., see 
Abū ʿAbd Allāh Muḥammad ibn Ismāʿīl al-Bukhārī, Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī, 9 vols 
(Beirut: Dār Ṭawq al-Najāh, 1422/[2001]; repr. of Bulaq: al-Maṭbaʿah al-Kubrá 
al-Amīrīyah, 1311−12), 3:16, jazāʾ al-ṣayd 17, bāb lubs al-silāḥ l-il-muḥrim, No. 
1844; 7:11, al-nikāḥ 25, bāb mā yaḥillu min al-nisāʾ wa-mā yaḥrumu, No. 5105; 7:46, 
al-ṭalāq 12, bāb al-khulʿ wa-kayfa al-ṭalāq fīhi, No. 5273; Abū Dāwūd Sulaymān 
ibn Ashʿath al-Sijistānī, Sunan Abī Dāwūd, ed. Muḥammad Muḥyī al-Dīn ʿAbd 
al-Ḥamīd, 4 vols (Beirut: al-Maktabat al-ʿAṣrīyah, n.d.; repr. of Cairo: al-Makta-
bah al-Tijārīyah al-Kubrá, [1354/1935]), 1:90, al-ṭahārah 123, bāb al-tayammum fī 
al-ḥaḍar, No. 330; 2:275, al-ṭalāq 27, bāb fī al-liʿān, No. 2251; 2:332, al-ṣawm 79, bāb 
al-muʿtakif yadkhulu al-bayt li-ḥājatihī, No. 2468; al-Tirmidhī, Jāmiʿ, 3:40, al-aḥkām 
28, bāb mā jāʾa fī-man malaka dhā raḥim maḥram, No. 1365; 4:11, al-qadar 1, bāb mā 
jāʾa fī al-tashdīd fī al-khawḍ fī al-qadar, No. 2133; 4:114, al-fitan 78, No. 2266; 4:305, 
ṣifat al-jannah 11, bāb mā jāʾa fī ṣifat al-khayl, No. 2544; 5:40, faḍāʾil al-Qurʾān 20, 
No. 2918; 5:171, tafsīr al-Qurʾān 10, bāb wa-min sūrat al-tawbah, No. 3092; 5:492, 
al-daʿawāt 85, No. 3516; 5:498, al-daʿawāt 91, No. 3525.
 55. ʿItr, Manhaj, 420–1.
 56. Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ, Muqaddimah, 248. See also Abū al-Fidāʾ Ismāʿīl ibn ʿUmar 
Ibn Kathīr, al-Bāʿith al-ḥathīth sharḥ Ikhtiṣār ʿulūm al-ḥadīth, ed. Aḥmad 
Muḥammad Shākir (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, n.d.), 56: ‘yughtafaru 
fī bābi ‘l-shawāhidi wa-’l-mutābiʿāti mina ‘l-riwāyati ʿan ḍaʿīfi ‘l-qarībi ḍaʿfi mā lā 
yughtafaru fī ‘l-uṣūl’, which implies the lower ranking of the mutābiʿ and shāhid 
than the aṣl.
 57. Abū al-Faḍl ʿIyāḍ ibn Mūsá al-Qāḍī, Sharḥ Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim lil-Qāḍī ʿIyāḍ al-musammá 
bi-Ikmāl al-muʿlim bi-fawāʾid Muslim, ed. Yaḥyá Ismāʿīl, 9 vols (Manṣūrah: Dār 
al-Wafāʾ, 1426/2005), 1:86–7; also see the introduction of Muslim, Jāmiʿ, 1:88–
106, and its translation, G. H. A. Juynboll, ‘Muslim’s Introduction to His Ṣaḥīḥ’, 
Jerusalem Studies in Arabic and Islam 5 (1984): 263–311, esp. 267.

 122 ] 
Ali Aghaei
 58. Ibn Abī Ḥātim al-Rāzī, Jarḥ, 2:37; see also Ibn Ṣalāḥ, Muqaddimah, 248. However, 
the permissive approach of the later hadith scholars towards mutābaʿah and 
istishhād by referring to weak transmitters’ hadiths runs counter to the rigor-
ous method of early hadith critics, and hence is subjected to some criticism; see 
Dickinson, Development of Early Sunnite Ḥadīth Criticism, 95–6. For a detailed dis-
cussion with various examples of the futile usage of mutābaʿah and istishhād, see 
Ṭāriq ibn ʿIwaḍ Allāh, al-Irshādāt fī taqwiyat al-aḥādīth bi-l-shawāhid wa-l mutābiʿāt 
(Cairo: Maktabat Ibn Taymīyah, 1417/1998).
 59. Al-Khaṭīb al-Baghdādī, Kitāb al-Kifāyah fī ʿilm al-riwāyah, ed. Aḥmad ʿUmar 
Hāshim (Beirut: Dār al-Kitāb al-ʿArabī, 1405/1985), 171–3; see also ibid., 469–72.
 60. Zayn al-Dīn ʿAbd al-Raḥmān Ibn Rajab al-Ḥanbalī, Sharḥ ʿIlal al-Tirmidhī, ed. 
Nūr al-Dīn ʿItr, 2 vols ([n.p.]: Dār al-Mallāḥ, 1398/ 1978), 1:352. See also Ibn 
al-Ṣalāḥ, Muqaddimah, 244, who expresses that many of the hadith scholars 
considered the isolated hadith to be mardūd (‘rejected’), munkar (‘unfamiliar’) 
or shādhdh (‘anomalous’) (iṭlāq al-hukm ʿalá al-tafarrud bi-l-radd aw al-nakirah aw 
al-shudhūdh).
 61. Ibn Rajab, Sharḥ, 1:450. However, al-Bardījī asserts that ‘if a matn is known, even 
though it is transmitted through a single strand, it is not then considered munkar 
or maʿlūl’; see ibid., 1:452.
 62. Ibn Rajab, Sharḥ, 1:451–6. In one case, Ibn Ḥanbal quotes Yaḥyá ibn Saʿīd 
al-Qaṭṭān as saying, ‘The hadith is munkar so far as it is known from no more 
than a single strand.’
 63. Al-Ḥākim, ʿUlūm al-ḥadīth, 119.
 64. Abū Yaʿlá Khalīl ibn ʿAbd Allāh al-Khalīlī al-Qazwīnī, al-Irshād fī maʿrifat 
ʿulamāʾ al-ḥadīth, ed. Muḥammad Saʿīd ʿUmar Idrīs, 3 vols (Riyadh: Maktabat 
al-Rushd, 1409), 1:176–7.
 65. Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ, Muqaddimah, 237.
 66. Abū Muḥammad ʿAlī ibn Aḥmad Ibn Ḥazm al-Andalusī, al-Iḥkām fī uṣūl 
al-aḥkām, ed. Aḥmad Shākir, 8 vols (Cairo: Maṭbaʿat al-ʿĀṣimah, n.d.), 1:125–6; 
see also ibid., 2:208–10.
 67. Abū al-Ḥusayn ʿAlī ibn Muḥammad Ibn al-Qaṭṭān al-Fāsī, Bayān al-wahm wa-l-
īhām al-wāqiʿayn fī Kitāb al-Iḥkām, ed.  Ḥusayn Āyt Saʿīd, 6 vols (Riyadh: Dār 
al-Ṭaybah, 1418/1997), 5:461.
 68. Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ, Muqaddimah, 237: ‘The shādhdh is not a hadith that only a single 
reliable transmitter (and no one else) relates. Rather, the shādhdh is the one a reli-
able transmitter relates that conflicts with what other people have related’ (laysa 
‘l-shādhdhu min an yarwiya ‘l-thiqatu mā lā yarwīhi ghayruhū, innamā ‘l-shādhdhu 
an yarwiya ‘l-thiqatu ḥadīthan yukhālifu mā rawá ‘l-nās). See also al-Ḥākim, ʿUlūm 
al-ḥadīth, 119; al-Khaṭīb, Kifāyah, 171; Ibn Rajab, Sharḥ 1:352. Thus, al-Shāfiʿī 
apparently, as ascribed to him, makes it conditional not only on the trans-
mission of ‘a reliable transmitter’, but also on its ‘not conflicting with others’ 
transmission’.
 69. Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ, Muqaddimah, 243.
 70. Ibid.
 71. Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ, Muqaddimah, 244–6.

  
The Common Link  
[ 123
 72. For a detailed discussion, see Ibrāhīm al-Lāḥim, ‘Tafarrud al-thiqah bi-l-ḥadīth’, 
al-Ḥikmah 240 (2004): 117–56, at 140–56. For a similar approach to the issue of 
ziyādat al-thiqah, i.e., the addition made by the reliable transmitter, see Jonathan 
A. C. Brown, ‘Criticism of the Proto-Hadith Canon: al-Dāraquṭnī’s Adjustment 
of the Ṣaḥīḥayn’, Journal of Islamic Studies 15(1) (2004): 1–37, at 8–11; Brown, 
‘Critical Rigor’; Ali Aghaei, ‘Mowājehe-ye moḥaddethān-e mosalmān bā padīde-ye 
“roshd-e wārūne-ye sanadhā”’ (‘Backward Growth of isnāds from the Viewpoint 
of Muslim Hadith Scholars’), Ṣaḥīfe-ye mobīn 48 (2011): 175–205.
 73. For example, Ibn ʿAdī, Kāmil 1:211, 431, 2:298, 326, 3:119–20, 201, 253, 352, 353, 
7:292; al-Dāraquṭnī, ʿIlal, 5:131, 7:139. Similar formulas such as ‘madāru ‘l-isnādi 
ʿalá fulān’ and ‘madāru ‘ṭ-uruqi ʿalá fulān’ are also used.
 74. For example, Ibn ʿAdī, Kāmil 3:170, 4:205, 7:170; Abū Bakr Aḥmad ibn al-Ḥusayn 
al-Bayhaqī, Kitāb al-Sunan al-kubrá wa-fī dhaylihī al-Jawhar al-naqī li-ʿAlāʾ al-Dīn 
ibn ʿAlī ʿUthmān al-Mārdīnī al-Shahīr bi-Ibn al-Turkumānī, 10 vols (Hyderabad: 
Majlis Dāʾirat al-Maʿārif al-Niẓāmīyah, 1344–55), 1:147, 2:313, 380, 6:73, 8:31, 
9:274.
 75. For example, Ibn Ḥibbān, Kitāb al-Majrūḥīn min al-muḥaddithīn wa-al-ḍuʿafāʾ 
wa-al-matrūkīn, ed. Maḥmūd Ibrāhīm Zāyid, 3 vols (Aleppo: Dār al-Waʿy, 
1395–6/1975–6), 1:240.
 76. For example, Ibn ʿAdī, Kāmil 4:105.
 77. For example, al-Dāraquṭnī, ʿIlal 7:204–5.
 78. For example, Ibn ʿAdī, Kāmil 1:233, 390, 2:27, 147, 155, 197, 259, 265, 302, 3:106, 
364, 6:200, 5:39, 277, 378, 7:18.
 79. For example, Ibn ʿAdī, Kāmil 1:166, 173, 177, 188, 190, 198, 244, 257, 327, 363 and 
passim.
 80. For example, Ibn ʿAdī, Kāmil 1:8, 185, 3:170.
 81. See above.
 82. This part of the isnād is called aṣl al-sanad (‘the root of the isnād’). See Ibn Ḥajar, 
Nuzhat al-naẓar, 64: ‘aṣlu ‘l-sanadi ayi ‘l-mawḍiʿu ‘lladhī yadūru ‘l-isnādu ʿalayhi 
wa-yarjiʿu wa-law taʿaddati ‘ṭuruqu ilayhi wa-huwa ṭarafuhu ʾlladhī fīhi ‘ṣ-aḥābī’; 
see also Muḥammad ibn al-Murtaḍá al-Zabīdī, Bulghat al-arīb fī muṣṭalaḥ āthār 
al-ḥabīb, ed. ʿAbd al-Fattāḥ Abū Ghuddah (Aleppo: Maktabat al-Maṭbūʿāt 
al-Islāmīyah, 1408), 178, who uses the terms aṣl al-sanad and madār concurrently.
 83. See above.
 84. See above.
 85. See al-Mizzī, Tuḥfah 8:91–3, No. 10612. Al-Dhahabī provides a long list of 
persons who transmitted this hadith from Yaḥyá ibn Saʿīd al-Anṣārī. See Shams 
al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad al-Dhahabī, Siyar aʿlām al-nubalāʾ, ed. Shuʿayb 
Arnaʾūṭ et al., 25 vols (Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Risālah, 1401–9/1981–8), 5:476–81. 
See also Juynboll, ECḤ, xx–xxi, 676–7. While in the later collections attempts 
are made to provide mutābiʿāt and shawāhid for this hadith, none of them are 
accepted by the hadith critics. For an overview of the issue, see Muḥammad 
ibn Jaʿfar al-Kattānī, Naẓm al-mutanāthir fī al-ḥadīth al-mutawātir (Cairo: Dār al-
Kutub al-Salafīyah, n.d.), 24–8.
 86. Al-Khalīlī, Irshād, 1:167; see also Ibn Ḥajar, Talkhīṣ al-ḥabīr fī takhrīj aḥādīth al-Rāfiʿī 

 124 ] 
Ali Aghaei
al-kabīr, ed. ʿĀdil Aḥmad ʿAbd al-Mawjūd and ʿAlī Muḥammad Muʿawwaḍ, 4 
vols (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 1419/1989), 1:215–16.
 87. See Yaʿqūb ibn Sufyān al-Fasawī, Kitāb al-Maʿrifah wa-l-tārīkh, ed. Akram Ḍiyāʾ 
al-ʿUmarī, 3rd edn, 4 vols (Medina: Maktabat al-Dār, 1410/1989), 2:153; Ibn 
ʿAdī, Kāmil 3:170, ‘ḥadīth al-ḍaḥik fī al-ṣalāh . . . kulluhū yadūru ʿalá Abī ‘l-ʿĀliyah’; 
cf. al-Mizzī, Tuḥfah 13:193, No. 18642. For other early usages of madār, see, e.g., 
al-Bukhārī, al-Tārīkh al-ṣaghīr, ed. Maḥmūd Ibrāhīm Zāyid, 2 vols (Aleppo 
and Cairo: Dār al-Waʿy and Dār al-Turāth, 1396/1977), 2:35; al-Bukhārī, Kitāb 
al-Tārīkh al-kabīr, 8 vols (Hyderabad: Maṭbaʿat Jamʿīyat Dāʾirat al-Maʿārif 
al-ʿUthmānīyah, 1360–84), 5:233, 6:461; al-Fasawī, Maʿrifah 2:154, 3:33.
 88. ‘Al-isnād yadūru ʿalá sittah’: ʿAlī ibn ʿAbd Allāh Ibn al-Madīnī, al-ʿIlal, ed. 
Muḥammad Muṣṭafá al-Aʿẓamī, 2nd edn (Beirut: al-Maktab al-Islāmī, 1392/1972, 
repr. 1400/1980), 36–7. He states that the knowledge of these six scholars is 
then transferred to later hadith collectors, such as Ibn Jurayj (d. 150/767–8?), 
Muḥammad ibn Isḥāq (d. 151/768), Maʿmar ibn Rāshid (d. 154/770–1), Saʿīd 
ibn Abī ʿArūbah (d. 156/773), ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn ʿAmr al-Awzāʿī (d. 157/774), 
Shuʿbah ibn al-Ḥajjāj, Sufyān al-Thawrī, Ḥammād ibn Salamah, Abū ʿAwānah 
al-Waḍḍāḥ ibn ʿAbd Allāh (d. 176/792–3), Mālik ibn Anas, Hushaym ibn Bashīr 
and Sufyān ibn ʿUyaynah (d. 198/814); see ibid., 37–9. See also al-Khaṭīb, Jāmiʿ, 
2:448–9, where under the title maʿrifat al-shuyūkh alladhīna tadūru al-asānīd 
ʿalayhim, before quoting from Ibn al-Madīni, he quotes a similar statement from 
Abū Dāwūd al-Ṭayālisī (d. 203−4/818−19): ‘Knowledge could be found with 
four persons: al-Zuhrī, Qatādah, Abū Isḥāq, and al-Aʿmash.’
 89. ‘Kullu imāmin min aʾimmati ‘l-ḥadīthi qad tafarrada bi-riwāyatin ʿan shuyūkhin lam 
yarwi ʿanhum ghayruh’: al-Ḥākim, ʿUlūm al-ḥadīth, 161.
 90. In hadith terminology, they are called wuḥdān (singular wāḥid); see ʿItr, Manhaj, 
136–7.
 91. Muslim says, ‘About ninety hadiths from the Prophet are transmitted by 
al-Zuhrī of which none is transmitted by others’: Jāmiʿ, 5:82, al-aymān 2, bāb man 
ḥalafa bi-’l-Lāt wa-l-ʿUzzá, No. 1647.
 92. Al-Ḥākim, ʿUlūm al-ḥadīth, 159–61; see also Ibn Ṣalāḥ, Muqaddimah, 557–8. 
Muslim provides a long list of those transmitters who are alone in relating 
hadiths in addition to the names of more than 240 transmitters who alone 
related from them: see Muslim, al-Munfaridāt wa-l-wuḥdān, ed. ʿAbd al-Ghaffār 
Sulaymān al-Bundārī and Muḥammad al-Saʿīd ibn Basyūnī Zaghlūl (Beirut: Dār 
al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 1410/1988).
 93. ‘Al-aʾimmah al-thiqāt al-mashhūrīna min al-tābiʿīna wa-atbāʿihim mimman yujmaʿu 
ḥadīthuhum’: al-Ḥākim, ʿUlūm al-ḥadīth, 240–9. See also Abū ʿAbd Allāh 
Muḥammad ibn Isḥāq ibn Mandah, Shurūṭ al-aʾimmah: risālah fī bayān faḍl 
al-akhbār wa-sharḥ madhāhib ahl al-āthār wa-ḥaqīqat al-sunan wa-taṣḥīḥ al-riwāyāt, 
ed. ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ʿAbd al-Jabbār al-Farīwāʾī (Riyadh: Dār al-Muslim, 
1416/1995), 32, ‘hum aʾimmatu d-dīni wa-ḥuffāẓuhū . . . ilayhim intahá ʿilmu 
‘l-asānīd . . . yuqbalu infirāduhum’. For similar lists, see ibid., 44–67; al-Khaṭīb, 
Jāmiʿ, 2:457–8.
 94. Ibn ʿAdī, Kāmil, 3:352–3.

  
The Common Link  
[ 125
 95. ‘Man ṣāma Ramaḍāna wa-atbaʿahū bi-sittin min Shawwālin fa-huwa ṣāʾimu ‘l-dahr’: 
al-Mizzī, Tuḥfah, 3:100–1, No. 3482.
 96. ‘Kasru ʿaẓmi ‘l-mayyiti ka-kasrihī ḥayyan’; see al-Mizzī, Tuḥfah, 12:407, No. 17893.
 97. ‘ʿAlayka bi-Bayt al-Maqdis …’; Ibn ʿAdī, Kāmil, 3:119–20. For a similar example, 
see al-Dāraquṭnī, ʿIlal, 11:323, Abū Sufyān Ṭarīf ibn Shihāb al-Saʿdī as madār; cf. 
al-Mizzī, Tuḥfah, 3:465, No. 4357.
 98. Ibn ʿAdī, ʿIlal, 2:326; cf. al-Mizzī, Tuḥfah, 7:325–6, No. 9976, ‘yaʾummu ’l-qawma 
aqraʾuhum li-kitābi ’Llāh’. For another example, see Ibn ʿAdī, Kāmil, 2:326, where 
he considers Abū Isḥāq al-Sabīʿī the madār of the hadith narrated through 
Nājiyah ibn Kaʿb al-ʿAnazī from ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib and hence discredits the 
transmission of Ḥasan ibn Yazīd from al-Suddī. See also al-Dāraquṭnī, ʿIlal, 
4:144; cf. al-Mizzī, Tuḥfah, 7:449–50, No. 10287.
 99. Ibn ʿAdī, Kāmil, 3:166–70; cf. Juynboll, ECḤ, 42.
 100. Al-Dāraquṭnī, ʿIlal, 7:137–9; cf. al-Mizzī, Tuḥfah, 8:470, No. 11489. For other 
examples, see al-Dāraquṭnī, ʿIlal, 5:130–1, 7:204–5.
 101. Al-Ḥākim, al-Mustadrak ʿalá al-Ṣaḥīḥayn, ed. Yūsuf ʿAbd al-Raḥmān al-Marʿashlī, 
4 vols (Beirut: Dār al-Maʿrifah, n.d.), 1:152.
 102. Özkan, ‘Common Link and its Relation to the Madār’, 61.
 103. Al-Bayhaqī, Sunan, 3:41.
 104. Al-Bayhaqī, Sunan, 8:42.
 105. Al-Bayhaqī, Sunan, 2:313.
 106. Al-Bayhaqī, Sunan, 6:73
 107. Al-Bayhaqī, Sunan, 8:30–1; cf. al-Fasawī, Maʿrifah, 3:33, quoting ʿAlī ibn 
al-Madīnī.
 108. Abū ʿUmar Yūsuf ibn ʿAbd Allāh Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, al-Istidhkār al-jāmiʿ li-madhāhib 
fuqahāʾ al-amṣār, ed. Sālim Muḥammad ʿAṭāʾ and Muḥammad ʿAlī Muʿawwaḍ, 
8 vols (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 1421/2000), 5:185; Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, 
al-Tamhīd li-mā fī al-Muwaṭṭaʾ min al-maʿānī wa-l-asānīd, ed. Muṣṭafá ibn Aḥmad 
al-ʿAlawī and Muḥammad ʿAbd al-Kabīr al-Bakrī, 24 vols (Morocco: Wizārat 
ʿUmūm al-Awqāf wa-l-Shuʾūn al-Islāmīyah, 1387/1967), 2:64, 6:96; cf. al-Mizzī, 
Tuḥfah, 8:177, 179−80, 205, Nos 10808, 10822 and 10891, respectively.
 109. Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, Istidhkār, 5:185; Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, Tamhīd, 2:64, 6:96; see also 
Ibn ʿAdī, Kāmil, 3:253; cf. al-Mizzī, Tuḥfah, 12:367, 372, Nos 17770 and 17782, 
respectively.
 110. Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, Tamhīd, 4:328, 23:386; cf. al-Mizzī, Tuḥfah, 3:157, No. 3582, 
11:204, No. 15670. For other instances, see Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, Istidhkār, 1:68, 2:310, 
3:243; Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, Tamhīd, 1:162, 2:22, 46, 119, 4:102, 5:258, 6:39, 8:115; 
Abū al-Faraj ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn ʿAlī ibn al-Jawzī, Kitāb al-Mawḍūʿāt, ed. ʿAbd 
al-Raḥmān Muḥammad ʿUthmān, 3 vols (Medina: al-Maktabah al-Salafīyah, 
1386–8/1966–8), 1:316, 331, 3:111, 217, 247, 262; al-Jawzī, al-ʿIlal al-mutanāhiyah 
fī al-aḥādīth al-wāhiyah, ed. Khalīl Mays, 2 vols (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 
1403/1983), 1:145–6, 149, 334, 367, 2:644, 811, 884, 915.
 111. Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, Istidhkār, 1:193; Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, Tamhīd, 20:259; cf. al-Mizzī, 
Tuḥfah, 6:51, No. 7460.
 112. Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, Tamhīd, 1:161. For other examples, see Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, Istidhkār, 

 126 ] 
Ali Aghaei
1:526, ‘lā mimman yuḥtajju bihī fī-mā khūlifa fīh’; Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, Tamhīd, 2:163, 
‘laysa ʿindahum mimman yuḥtajju bihī fī-mā khūlifa fīhi awi ’nfarada bih’, 21:59, ‘laysa 
mimman yuḥtajju bi-mā ’nfarada bihī’, 24:18, ‘laysa bi-ḥujjatin fī-mā ’nfarada bihī’.
 113. See above.
 114. Al-Nawawī, Khulāṣat al-aḥkām fī muhimmāt al-sunan wa-qawāʿid al-Islām, ed. 
Ḥusayn Ismāʿīl al-Jamal, 2 vols (Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Risālah, 1418/1997), 1:87, 
207, 369, 452, 499, 538, 2:769, 791, 1013, 1017.
 115. ʿAlāʾ al-Dīn ʿAlī ibn ʿUthmān Ibn al-Turkumānī, al-Jawhar al-naqī fī al-radd ʿalá 
al-Bayhaqī, under al-Bayhaqī, Sunan, 1:67, 146, 148, 2:77, 180, 390, 396, 3:42, 286, 
295, 4:166, 5:32, 108, 323, 7:112, 124, 126, 197, 455, 477, 9:190.
 116. Jamāl al-Dīn ʿAbd Allāh ibn Yūsuf al-Zaylaʿī, Naṣb al-rāyah fī takhrīj aḥādīth 
al-Hidāyah, ed. Muḥammad ʿAwwāmah, 5 vols (Jeddah: Dār al-Qiblah l-il-
Thaqāfah al-Islāmīyah, 1418/1997), 1:52–3, 138–9, 196, 209, 332, 353, 395, 405, 
2:198, 252, 300, 3:232, 4:40–2, 202, 333.
 117. Sirāj al-Dīn Abū Ḥafṣ ʿUmar ibn ʿAlī Ibn al-Mulaqqin, al-Badr al-munīr fī takhrīj 
al-aḥādīth wa-al-āthār al-wāqiʿah fī al-Sharḥ al-kabīr, ed. Muṣṭāfá Abū al-Ghayẓ et 
al., 10 vols (Riyadh: Dār al-Hijrah, 1425/2004), 1:383, 660, 2:168, 300, 554–5, 575, 
3:101, 154, 4:8, 132, 186, 192, 223, 247–8, 326, 413, 5:55, 82, 182, 298, 305, 437, 6:62, 
68, 222, 522, 674, 708, 712, 7:463, 504, 523, 601, 626, 632, 8:76, 118, 368, 745, 9:141, 
247, 286, 293, 391, 460, 496, 538, 693.
 118. Nūr al-Dīn ʿAlī ibn Abī Bakr al-Haythamī, Majmaʿ al-zawāʾid wa-manbaʿ 
al-fawāʾid, 10 vols (Beirut: Dār al-Kitāb al-ʿArabī, n.d.), 1:16, 64, 115, 137, 159, 
219, 220, 240, 283, 2:54, 68, 142, 211, 229, 277, 4:65, 238, 328, 5:12, 122.
 119. Aḥmad ibn Abī Bakr al-Būṣīrī, Miṣbāḥ al-zujājah fī zawāʾid Ibn Mājah, ed. 
Muḥammad al-Muntaqá al-Kashnāwī, 4 vols (Beirut, Dār al-ʿArabīyah, 1983–5), 
1:154, 2:8, 55, 79, 99, 3:13, 85, 110, 182, 233, 4:113, 139; al-Būṣīrī, Itḥāf al-khiyarah 
al-maharah bi-zawāʾid al-masānīd al-ʿasharah, ed. Abū Tamīm Yāsir ibn Ibrāhīm, 8 
vols (Riyadh: Dār al-Waṭan, 1420/1999), 1:91, 96, 105, 138, 142, 150, 167, 172, 182, 
187, 200, 203, 225, 243, 251, 262, 275, 297, 305, 329, 338, 360, 367, 419, 446, 455 and 
passim (more than 200 instances).
 120. Ibn Ḥajar, Talkhīṣ al-ḥabīr 1:119, 136, 215−16, 241, 266, 301, 302, 327, 336, 359, 
381, 402, 408, 414, 676, 2:9, 45, 68, 169, 202, 237, 378, 391, 558, 3:19, 57, 162, 180, 
321, 342−3, 454, 4:224, 234, 333, 355, 367, 428; Ibn Ḥajar, Fatḥ al-bārī fī sharḥ 
Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī, ed. Muḥibb al-Dīn al-Khaṭīb et al., 13 vols (n.p.: al-Maktabat 
al-Salafīyah, [1379/1960]), 1:411, 435, 573, 2:170, 288, 423, 501, 3:127, 4:13, 429, 
5:58, 6:179, 8:28, 618, 681, 9:53, 205, 573, 580, 625, 10:26, 430, 11:368, 538, 579, 617, 
12:354, 13:384, .
 121. Badr al-Dīn Abū Muḥammad Maḥmūd ibn Aḥmad al-ʿAynī, ʿUmdat al-qārī 
sharḥ Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī, 25 vols (Beirut: Dār Iḥyāʾ al-Turāth al-ʿArabī, n.d.; repr. of 
Cairo: Idārat al-Ṭibāʿah al-Munīrīyah, 1348/1930), 1:19, 63, 3:97, 275, 279, 4:243, 
5:107, 283, 287, 289, 6:188, 245, 307, 7:304, 8:39, 9:123, 10:285, 11:13, 77, 78, 13:55, 
19:210, 268, 20:28, 21:160.
 122. Ibn al-Turkumānī, Jawhar, 3:42–3. For more examples, see ibid., 5:108, 323–4, 
7:112.
 123. See above, n. 103.

  
The Common Link  
[ 127
 124. Al-Būṣīrī, Itḥāf al-khiyarah, 3:41. For another example, see ibid., 7:321.
 125. On his role as a madār in another isnād, see Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, Istidhkār, 2:309; Ibn 
ʿAbd al-Barr, Tamhīd, 21:102.
 126. Al-Būṣīrī, Itḥāf al-khiyarah, 5:514. For similar examples, see ibid., 1:150, 172, 
200–1, 251, 275–6, 329, 419, 2:50, 192, 3:30, 78, 121, 176, 284, 302, 368–9, 390, 4:18, 
62; al-Būṣīrī, Miṣbāḥ al-zujājah, 2:99, 3:13, 233, 4:139.
 127. Ibn Ḥajar, Talkhīṣ al-ḥabīr, 2:45–6. For other examples, see ibn Ḥajar, Fatḥ al-bārī, 
1:436, 2:501, 8:681.
 128. Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, Tamhīd, 2:46. For his being disqualified, see Ibn ʿAdī, Kāmil, 
4:304.
 129. Al-ʿAynī, ʿUmdat al-qārī, 10:285. For another example, see ibid., 11:78.
 130. Al-Bayhaqī, Sunan, 7:197.
 131. Ibn al-Turkumānī, Jawhar, 7:197; cf. al-Bayhaqī, Sunan, 7:196.
 132. See above.
 133. Al-Būṣīrī, Itḥāf al-khiyarah, 3:78.
 134. Al-Khaṭīb al-Ḥasanī, Maʿrifat madār al-isnād, 1:36, 55–77. It is the case also for 
the responsible transmitters of a major number of hadiths labelled gharīb in 
the ʿilal al-ḥadīth literature (such as Ibn Abī Ḥātim’s ʿIlal, Ibn ʿAdī’s Kāmil, and 
al-Dāraquṭnī’s ʿIlal); see al-Ḥamām, Tafarrud, 292–3, 298.
 135. Josef Horovitz, ‘Alter und Ursprung des Isnād’, Der Islam 8(1/2) (1917): 39–47, 
esp. at 43–4; James Robson, ‘The Isnād in Muslim Tradition’, Transactions of 
the Glasgow University Oriental Society 15 (1953): 15–26, esp. at 21–2; Juynboll, 
‘Some Isnād-Analytical Methods’, 354; Juynboll, ‘Nāfiʿ, the Mawlā of Ibn ʿUmar’, 
210; Juynboll, ‘The Date of the Great Fitna’, Arabica 20(2) (1973): 142–59; cf. also 
Motzki, ‘Whither Ḥadīth Studies?’, 50–1; for a more detailed discussion of the 
origin of the isnād; see Pavel Pavlovitch, ‘The Origin of the Isnād and al-Mukhtār 
b. Abī ʿUbayd’s Revolt in Kūfa (66–7/685–7)’, al Qanṭara 39(1) (2018): 17–48, esp. 
at 19–32, 41–4.
 136. Al-isnād al-ʿālī is one with a small number of transmitters, for the fewer trans-
mitters mentioned in an isnād, the more ‘elevated’ it is considered; see Ibn 
al-Ṣalāḥ, Muqaddimah, 440.
 137. Cf. Ibn Mandah, 32: ‘hum aʾimmat al-dīn wa-ḥuffāẓuhū . . . ilayhim intahá ʿilm 
al-asānīd wa- . . . yuqbalu infirāduhum’.
 138. Al-Dhahabī, al-Mūqiẓah fī ʿilm muṣṭalaḥ al-ḥadīth, ed. ʿAbd al-Fattāḥ Abū 
Ghuddah (Beirut: Dār al-Bashāʾir al-Islāmīyah, 1405/1985), 77.
 139. Al-Dhahabī, Mūqiẓah, 77.
 140. Al-Dhahabī, Mūqiẓah, 77–8.
 141. ‘Idhā ḥaddatha ʿan al-maʿrūfīn mā lā yaʿrifuhū ’l-maʿrūfūn’: Ibn ʿAbī Ḥātim, Jarḥ, 
2:32; Ibn ʿAdī, Kāmil, 1:156. For a slightly different quotation, see Ibn Ḥibbān, 
Majrūḥīn, 1:74.
 142. Muslim, Jāmiʿ, 1:5–6; Muslim, Kitāb al-Tamyīz, ed. Muḥammad Muṣṭafá 
al-Aʿẓamī (Riyadh: Maktabat al-Kawthar, 1410/1990), 172.
 143. Abū Dāwūd, Risālah ilá ahl Makka, in Thalāth rasāʾil fī ʿilm muṣṭalaḥ al-ḥadīth, ed. 
ʿAbd al-Fattāḥ Abū Ghuddah (Beirut: Dār al-Bashāʾir al-Islāmīyah, 1426/2005), 
47.

 128 ] 
Ali Aghaei
 144. Al-Ḥākim, ʿUlūm al-ḥadīth, 99: ‘al-nawʿ al-thānī min al-afrād aḥādīth yatafarradu 
bi-riwāyatihā rajul wāḥid ʿan imām min al-aʾimmah’.
 145. Al-Ḥākim, ʿUlūm al-ḥadīth, 99–100.
 146. ‘… al-aʾimmah mimman yujmaʿu ḥadīthuhum’; cf. Ibn Ṣalāḥ, Muqaddimah, 456.
 147. For a discussion on other possibilities of appearance of single strands and 
isolated transmissions in hadith literature, see also Motzki, ‘Whither Ḥadīth 
Studies?’ 51–4; Motzki, ‘Dating Muslim Tradition’, 227–8, 238–40.
 148. Juynboll, ‘(Re)appraisal of Some Technical Terms in Ḥadīth Science’, 360.
 149. Juynboll, ‘Some Isnād-Analytical Methods’, 351–2.
 150. Michael Cook, Early Muslim Dogma: a Source-Critical Study (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1981), 107–8.
 151. Özkan, ‘Common Link and its Relation to the Madār’, 75.
 152. In ECḤ (xxxviii), Juynboll points out that the oldest common link is the 
Successor Abū al-ʿĀliyah Rufayʿ ibn Mihrān al-Riyāḥī. For many examples he 
labelled transmitters ‘seeming common links’, not ‘real common links’: see also 
ECḤ, throughout the work.
 153. Özkan, ‘(Re)appraisal’, 52, n. 56.
 154. For different conceptions of the common link, see Andreas Görke, ‘Eschatology, 
History, and the Common Link: a Study in Methodology’, in Herbert Berg 
(ed.), Method and Theory in the Study of Islamic Origins, Islamic History and 
Civilization, Studies and Texts, 49 (Leiden: Brill, 2003), 179–208, at 188–95.
 155. See, for example, Motzki, ‘Dating Muslim Traditions’, 241–2.
 156. For more detailed discussion, see Motzki, ‘Dating Muslim Traditions’, 251.
 157. See above, n. 23.
 158. As Özkan himself states, ‘the commentators . . . typically search for the mutābiʿāt 
or shawāhid of isnāds in which the madār is labelled as “weak”’; Özkan, ‘Common 
Link and its Relation to the Madār’, 65.
 159. In his conclusion, he repeats the notion of the ‘“common link” in the Schachtian–
Juynbollian sense’: Özkan, ‘Common Link and its Relation to the Madār’, 77.
 160. See Schacht, Origins of Muhammadan Jurisprudence, 163–75; Juynboll, Muslim 
Tradition, 206–17; Juynboll, ‘Some Isnād-Analytical Methods’, 353; Juynboll, 
ECḤ, xvi–xxviii.
 161. See Cook, Early Muslim Dogma, 107–8; Michael Cook, ‘Eschatology and the 
Dating of Traditions’, Princeton Papers in Near Eastern Studies 1 (1992): 23–47; 
Patricia Crone, Roman, Provincial and Islamic Law: the Origins of the Islamic Patronate 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987), 29–30; Norman Calder, Studies 
in Early Muslim Jurisprudence (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1993), 236–7.
 162. Furthermore, one could also identify those transmitters who are responsible 
for the text variants and developments in different versions of the hadith 
through the application of the isnād-cum-matn analysis. See Motzki, ‘Dating 
Muslim Traditions’, 226–8, 238–41; Motzki, ‘Whither Ḥadīth Studies?’ 51–4. For 
a recent, comprehensive description and analysis of the isnād-cum-matn method, 
see Pavel Pavlovitch, The Formation of the Islamic Understanding of Kalāla in the 
Second Century ah (718–816 ce): Between Scripture and Canon, Islamic History and 
Civilization, Studies and Texts, 126 (Leiden: Brill, 2016), esp. 22–49.

 [ 129 ]
CHAPTER
6
Hadith Criticism between Traditionists 
and Jurisprudents
Mutaz al-Khatib
Western scholarship on the methods developed by Muslim critics for evalu-
ating the authenticity of hadith reports have focused predominantly on isnād 
criticism as opposed to matn criticism.1 Through the mediating influence of 
Muslim modernists, the question of matn criticism in classical hadith schol-
arship and its sufficiency or lack thereof became a hotly debated topic in 
Muslim scholarship over the course of the twentieth century, and served as 
an important proxy for the broader question of the extent to which the Islamic 
tradition may or may not need far-reaching internal reform. Advocates of 
sweeping reform have pointed to the lack of matn criticism as an instance 
of the fideism and irrationality of the traditional ʿulamāʾ, while defenders of 
tradition have sought to prove that hadith critics did in fact apply matn criti-
cism in their evaluation of hadith reports.2 Efforts to substantiate the pedi-
gree of matn criticism have often focused on the criteria for matn criticism 
(ʿalāmāt waḍʿ al-ḥadīth) found in post-formative manuals on ʿulūm al-ḥadīth 
and on the different chapters related to matn in these manuals.3 Other works 
have focused on the applications of matn criticism through a smattering of 
examples drawn from the generation of the Companions themselves4 and on 
forged hadith literature, especially the works of Ibn al-Jawzī (d. 597/1201) 
and Ibn Qayyim al-Jawzīyah (d. 751/1350).5
Less attention has been given in Western scholarship to hadith criticism 
in the literature of jurisprudence (uṣūl al-fiqh). This chapter will present a 
comparative analysis of the theory and practice of matn criticism between 
traditionists (muḥaddithūn) and jurisprudents (uṣūlīyūn). When viewed from 
this comparative perspective, a number of new questions concerning matn 
criticism arise. What, precisely, was the nature of matn criticism among these 
two groups and to what extent, if at all, did their approaches overlap? In 
what ways did matn criticism differ across legal schools? In what ways was 
the approach to matn criticism among the adherents of some legal schools 
closer to that of hadith critics than it was among adherents of others? How 

 130 ] 
Mutaz al-Khatib
was the practice of matn criticism shaped by the epistemological frameworks 
and overall aims of the separate disciplines of hadith and jurisprudence?
Hadith Critics’ Criteria for matn Criticism
Hadith critics’ use of matn criticism led them to identify several different 
categories of problematic hadiths. I have identified five categories here 
for the sake of convenience, and to a large extent they align with cat-
egories discussed in the mature genre of ʿulūm al-ḥadīth, starting with the 
work of al-Ḥākim al-Naysābūrī (d. 405/1014) and al-Khaṭīb al-Baghdādī 
(d. 463/1071). First, was the criticism of anomalous reports (al-taʿlīl bi-
al-tafarrud). Munkar, tafarrud, gharīb and shādhdh were all used to denote 
hadiths that were anomalous in terms of their transmission, their contents 
or both.6 The critics recognised that trustworthy narrators and even nar-
rators of the highest calibre also narrated anomalous and objectionable 
reports. Determining whether the narration of anomalous reports detracted 
from the reputation of a given narrator or whether the narrator’s reputation 
was sufficient to strengthen the quality of the anomalous report was an 
ultimately subjective judgement and there was no final agreement on this 
question among hadith critics.
The criticism of additions and interpolations (al-taʿlīl bi-al-ziyādah) also had 
to do with anomalies. An addition (ziyādah) was defined as occurring when 
‘a group [of narrators] narrate a single hadith consisting of the same matn via 
the same isnād and one of the narrators includes an addition not mentioned 
by the other narrators’.7 Mudraj refers to a subcategory of ziyādah in which the 
additional element is judged to be an interpolation that was not in fact part of 
the original matn or isnād. Early collectors like Muslim and al-Tirmidhī state 
that ziyādah can be accepted only from trustworthy narrators whose memo-
ries have proved to be especially reliable, but in practice this served more as 
a general guideline than an absolute criterion.8
A third approach employed by hadith critics was evaluating whether a 
hadith contradicted what they considered to be established information 
(al-taʿlīl bi-al-mukhālafah). Such hadiths were said to suffer from a defect 
known as shudhūdh or mukhālafah, which consisted of an irreconcilable 
variance with more authentic hadiths, a well-established practice or even 
historical facts. Although these terms were originally used in an elastic, non-
technical sense, shudhūdh came to refer to contradictions within the matn of 
a single hadith, such that one version contradicts other more established 
versions, while mukhālafah came to refer to the overall meaning of a hadith 
contradicting information established through other sources.9
Fourthly, hadith critics considered the extent of inconsistency found in 
the wording and meaning of various versions of a single report. A minor 
difference in wording, referred to as ikhtilāf, was usually tolerated if it could 
be reasonably harmonised or if preference could be established for one 
version over another. A subcategory of ikhtilāf known as iḍṭirāb referred to 

  
Traditionists and Jurisprudents  
[ 131
inconsistency in wording and meaning that was too extensive to be recon-
ciled or to establish a preference for one version of the hadith over another.10
In addition to the foregoing, hadith critics identified several other kinds 
of miscellaneous errors that narrators made in their transmissions, which 
they classified under the generic category of error (ghalaṭ). Error included 
conflating two different hadiths and changing the wording of a hadith in 
a manner that corrupts its meaning through omission, misreading, misun-
derstanding and the like. Although such errors were most common among 
weak  narrators, trustworthy narrators were not considered immune to them.
The Criteria of the Jurists
Hadith critics and jurists approached the hadith corpus with substantially 
different concerns. Whereas hadith critics were concerned predominantly 
with the authenticity of a given report in the sense of whether or not it was 
reliably attributed to the Prophet, jurists were concerned predominantly with 
its authority in the sense of whether or not it should be acted upon. Jurists 
and legal theorists debated the authority of hadiths within the genre of legal 
theory (uṣūl al-fiqh), whose structure and language were largely common to 
all four Sunni legal schools in spite of significant methodological differences 
between them. This genre built upon and standardised methods of legal 
reasoning that were already implicit among the foundational generations 
of the four schools. While all legal theorists used a common language, their 
senses of what sorts of matn criticism were acceptable differed substantially 
across the four schools. Even within a single school, a wide spectrum existed 
for the expression of ‘rationalist’ or ‘traditionalist’ tendencies. Figures like 
Abū Isḥāq al-Shīrāzī (d. 476/1083) and Ibn ʿAqīl (d. 513/1119) represented 
a rationalist tendency within the Shāfīʿī and Ḥanbalī schools, respectively, 
while figures like Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr (d. 463/1071) and al-Ṭaḥāwī (d. 321/933) 
represented a traditionalist tendency within the Mālikī and Ḥanafī schools. 
Furthermore, from roughly the fifth/eleventh century onwards, virtually 
all hadith scholars were affiliated with one of the four Sunni legal schools. 
Accordingly, there was a certain convergence between the theories of matn 
criticism operative among traditionists and jurists. However, in practice, 
approaches to matn criticism continued to be defined by the genre that a 
scholar wrote in as much as they were by affiliation with a particular legal 
school. Thus, although two figures like al-Zarkashī and Ibn Ḥajar both 
belonged to the Shāfiʿī school and wrote specialised works on hadith, the 
works of the former on legal theory and those of the latter on ʿulūm al-ḥadīth 
continued to frame matn criticism in markedly different ways.
The primary concerns of these two genres – authenticity and  authority 
– obviously overlapped, but both hadith critics and jurists recognised that 
they were not identical. In theory, both parties recognised that it was pos-
sible to affirm that a given hadith was reliably attributed to the Prophet 
without affirming that it constituted a valid basis for action due to abrogation 

 132 ] 
Mutaz al-Khatib
or some other consideration, and that the opposite was also true. Between 
these two affirmations, myriad possibilities existed for the four schools to 
debate how the authority of hadith reports should interact and be reconciled 
with the authority of other legal sources. The area of sharpest disagreement 
had to do with the authority of solitary reports (akhbār al-āḥād). The Shāfiʿīs 
and Ḥanbalīs were inclined to view these reports as trumping virtually all 
forms of legal evidence other than the Qurʾān and the mutawātir sunnah, 
whereas the Mālīkīs and especially the Ḥanafīs frequently allowed other 
considerations to attenuate or override the authority of solitary reports. In 
the formative period, these different tendencies were already typified in 
the opposition of ahl al-ḥadīth and ahl al-raʾy. As the legal schools evolved 
and attempted to codify their interpretive principles, the inchoate disagree-
ments that had divided their foundational generations were cemented and 
given more explicit theoretical grounding. In developed form, debates over 
the authority of solitary reports revolved around seven possible competing 
sources of authority.
1. Contradicting Reason
Jurists were virtually unanimous in holding that hadiths could be rejected if 
they were unreasonable. A classic formulation of this principle is that of the 
Shāfiʿī jurist Abū Isḥāq al-Shīrāzī:
If a reliable narrator narrates a report it can be rejected on the basis of a number 
of considerations: one of them is that it should contradict what is known of 
necessity by reason (mūjibāt al-ʿuqūl). Its invalidity is thus known, for revelation 
conveys only that which is judged possible by reason.11
Although such expressions were ubiquitous in works on legal theory, Sunni 
jurists were also careful to circumscribe this principle with various condi-
tions and caveats in an effort to ensure that it would not be employed too 
liberally. Among these was the stipulation that the contradiction be real 
(ḥaqīqīyah), meaning that all reasonable people would agree on it, and that 
it should occur within the purview of what is accessible to reason.12 In addi-
tion, it would have to be impossible to find an interpretation for the report 
that accorded with reason.13
The parameters created by such stipulations could only take shape in prac-
tice and their general validity, though contested at the level of detail, obvi-
ously depended in large measure on a tacit agreement among legal theorists 
on the broadest outlines of the relationship of reason to metaphysics – an 
agreement shaped in large measure by the Sunni self-definition in opposition 
to the Muʿtazilīs and philosophers. Thus, the import of the reports cited to 
exemplify this principle were most often of a theological rather than a legal 
nature. On the side of affirming the probity of reason, legal theorists men-
tioned the notorious hadith in which the Prophet is made to say that God 

  
Traditionists and Jurisprudents  
[ 133
created himself from the sweat of a horse, which all people of sound reason 
judged impossible.14 On the side of affirming the limits of human reason and 
the expansive possibilities of interpretation, jurists cited hadiths like the one 
in which the Prophet says that death will be brought in the form of a ram and 
slaughtered in front of the inhabitants of paradise and hell, which was con-
ceivable not only because it would take place in the rationally inaccessible 
realm of the unseen (al-ghayb), but because the language of the report could 
be understood metaphorically.15
While the parties to the emergent Sunni consensus of the fifth/tenth 
century might have agreed that such clear cases were useful in covering the 
flanks vulnerable to attacks from more extreme traditionalist or rational-
ist parties, the broad parameters that they provided still left ample room 
to grind old axes. Thus, on the one hand, al-Khaṭīb al-Baghdādī accepted 
in principle the idea that irrational reports could be rejected and quotes 
Abū Isḥāq al-Shīrāzī verbatim in his al-Faqīh wa-al-mutafaqqih. On the other 
hand, in the same work he includes extensive polemics against those who 
would dismiss the Sunnah on the basis of raʾy and supposed contradictions 
that were highly redolent of longstanding traditionalist attacks against the 
Ḥanafīs.16 Al-Khaṭīb’s nod towards the principle that hadiths must accord 
with reason was characteristic of the emergent détente between rationalism 
and traditionalism in the realm of theology. However, the extent to which 
juristic understandings of matn criticism would be allowed to whittle down 
the body of acceptable solitary hadith reports remained a significant bone of 
contention in the realm of legal interpretation, with the Shāfiʿīs and Ḥanbalīs 
to one side of the spectrum arrayed against the Mālikīs and especially the 
Ḥanafīs on the other.
2. Contradicting the Qurʾān
The question of the nature of the relationship between the Qurʾān and hadith 
and how their relative authority should be defined was, of course, a major 
preoccupation of the discipline of legal theory and one of the most obvious 
points dividing the four madhhabs from one another. One of the implications 
of this question was whether a hadith could be rejected, or at least whether 
its legal implications could be ignored, because it contradicted the Qurʾān. 
Among Sunnis, the notion that a solitary hadith report could be rejected 
due to its contradicting the Qurʾān became virtually synonymous with the 
Ḥanafī school, with the Shāfiʿīs and Ḥanbalīs opposing them in granting 
greater authority to solitary reports and, for the most part, denying the pos-
sibility of contradiction to begin with. The Mālikīs fell somewhere in the 
middle, dismissing certain hadith reports that contradicted the Qurʾān in 
practice without laying claim to the notion as an indispensable feature of 
their school’s methodology.
Dating the origins of this debate is beyond the scope of the present 
chapter.17 The notion that hadith reports must be in agreement with the 

 134 ] 
Mutaz al-Khatib
Qurʾān in order to be accepted was enshrined explicitly in a mursal hadith 
attributed to Muḥammad al-Bāqir (d. c. 114/733) and in a marfūʿ hadith 
attributed to some Companions. Sunni hadith critics found these reports 
unacceptable.18 In favour of the traditionalist point of view was a hadith in 
which the Prophet stated that he was ‘given the Qurʾān and the likes of it 
along with it’ and condemned a hypothetical individual who would lounge 
around on cushions declaring that the Qurʾān was all anyone needed.19 Each 
side could cite several such reports in favour of their position.
The duelling conceptualisations of the appropriate relationship between 
the Qurʾān and Sunnah that found early expression in hadith reports were 
mirrored and extended in methodological debates among the founding 
generations of the legal schools. It comes as no surprise that one of the first 
written testimonies to endorse setting aside hadith reports that contradict the 
Qurʾān in favour of the Qurʾān comes from Abū Yūsuf (d. 182/798), the pupil 
of Abū Ḥanīfah (d. 150/767) and a qadi under the ʿAbbāsids:
Narrations are increasing in abundance and from among them come things that 
are strange and unknown to the people of fiqh, not agreeing with the Book or 
the sunnah. So beware of anomalous hadiths and stick to what is attested by an 
abundance of hadiths, what the jurists (fuqahāʾ) know, and what is in agreement 
with the Book and the sunnah. Compare everything else with that, and [know 
that] whatever contradicts the Qurʾan is not from the Messenger of God, even if 
a narration has come down to that effect.20
Underpinning Abū Yūsuf’s comments is a conception of the Sunnah that 
was defined by communal reception and broad attestation rather than any 
specifically-defined formal criteria for evaluating individual hadith reports. 
This conception of Sunnah, which was broadly shared among the so-called 
ancient schools, freely endorsed setting aside formally sound hadith reports 
that were not widely attested in favour of other forms of evidence, including 
the Qurʾān.21
The opposite pole in the debate was emphasised by al-Shāfiʿī, who cited 
Abū Yūsuf’s discussion and responded to it as follows:
As for the position that he adopted of negating hadith and subjecting it to com-
parison with the Qurʾan, even if this were the case, it would be a proof against his 
argument since hadith does not contradict the Qurʾan. Rather, the hadith of the 
Messenger of God clarifies the intent of God with respect to general and specific 
[language] and abrogating and abrogated [rulings]. Furthermore, the sunnah laid 
down by the Messenger of God is an obligation for people by God’s command. So 
whoever accepts something from the Messenger of God has [ultimately] accepted 
it from God since God has clarified this in more than one place in his book.22
The argument in this passage formed one key element in al-Shāfiʿī’s far-
reaching reinterpretation of the Sunnah, which would vastly augment the 

  
Traditionists and Jurisprudents  
[ 135
authority of hadith in legal argumentation. Not only did an exclusively 
hadith-based conception of Sunnah supplant local traditions that functioned, 
in Abū Yūsuf’s conception, as a cumulative repository in which Sunnah was 
distilled both from the unwieldy body of hadith reports and from the prac-
tice of the post-prophetic legal community; it also became effectively incon-
ceivable that Sunnah could contradict the Qurʾān. Rather than ignoring the 
legal implications of hadith reports that sat in tension with local traditions 
or the legal sense of relevant Qurʾānic verses, in the framework laid out by 
al-Shāfiʿī one resolved such apparent tensions through any one of a number 
of harmonising tools.23
In the course of the third/ninth century, al-Shāfiʿī’s theories rapidly recon-
figured the terms on which debates concerning Islamic law took place. The 
force of his arguments within the legal community was attested both by 
extensions of his argument authored by traditionalists and by refutations 
authored by scholars unwilling to accept his comprehensive reformula-
tion of the appropriate methods of legal reasoning. Among traditionalists, 
Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal is reported to have written a treatise dedicated to arguing 
against the possibility of contradiction between sound hadith reports and the 
Qurʾān.24 Among Ḥanafīs, the most influential defence against the arguments 
of al-Shāfiʿī was a work by the qadi ʿĪsá ibn Abān (d. 221/836), in which he 
refined and systematised the relatively informal approach to hadith among 
early Ḥanafīs in response to al-Shāfiʿī’s polemics.25 One of the key elements 
of al-Shāfiʿī’s argument against his opponents was to point out their appar-
ently arbitrary acceptance and rejection of formally sound hadith reports, 
since even the Ḥanafīs made use of certain solitary hadith reports that sat 
in apparent tension with the Qurʾān. ʿĪsá ibn Abān sought to provide the 
Ḥanafīs with a comprehensive criterion on the issue, arguing that a solitary 
hadith report could only particularise the general language of the Qurʾān if 
such an interpretation had already been accepted at a broad communal level 
by generations of scholars.26 For ʿĪsá ibn Abān and the classical theorists of 
the Ḥanafī school, the issue ultimately revolved around the epistemological 
question of the degree of authority conferred upon hadith reports and other 
forms of legal evidence by their location along a spectrum of certainty. Their 
rejection of solitary hadith reports was based on the notion that the general 
meanings of the Qurʾān were certain at both the level of attribution (thubūt) 
and indication (dalālah) and could therefore not be particularised by a report 
that was merely probable at the level of attribution.27
In practice, the Ḥanafī stipulation of an absence of contradiction with the 
Qurʾān led to many substantive disagreements with the other three schools. 
For example, they rejected the hadith of Fāṭimah bint Qays indicating that an 
irrevocably divorced woman should not receive alimony due to the Qurʾānic 
verse stating, ‘Let the women [in their waiting period] live in the same 
manner as you live yourselves, in accordance with your means. And do 
not harass them in order to make their lives miserable. And if they are with 
child, spend freely on them until they deliver …’ (Q. 65:6).28 Similarly, they 

 136 ] 
Mutaz al-Khatib
rejected the hadith allowing the testimony of a single just witness along 
with an oath from the plaintiff due to the stipulation for two witnesses in 
the Qurʾān (Q. 2:282).29 The Mālikīs, although not known for restricting 
the authority of hadith on the basis of the Qurʾān to the same extent as the 
Ḥanafīs, also crafted their arguments on several issues in a similar fashion. 
They rejected a hadith prohibiting the consumption of birds of prey (lit. 
‘birds with talons’) due to the general indication of the verse, ‘Say: I do not 
find in what has been revealed to me anything forbidden for one who wishes 
to eat, other than carrion, flowing blood, the flesh of swine – it is loathsome – 
or a sinful offering over which any name other than God’s has been invoked’ 
(Q. 6:145).30 They also rejected a hadith regarding the special procedure for 
washing vessels licked by dogs due to the verse that allowed the use of dogs 
in hunting (Q. 5:4), reasoning from this that their saliva must be pure.31
3. Contradicting the mashhūr Sunnah
In addition to their stipulation of non-contradiction of the Qurʾān, Ḥanafī 
legal theorists also specified that solitary hadith reports must not contradict 
the sunnah mashhūrah (or maʿrūfah) if they were to constitute valid legal evi-
dence. Mashhūr hadiths were defined as reports that began as solitary reports 
with the first transmitter (the ṣaḥābī), but then became mutawātir among 
subsequent generations (the tābiʿūn onward).32 Because such reports were 
considered tantamount to mutawātir reports, they were effectively certain in 
their attribution and thus enjoyed the same level of authority as other certain 
forms of evidence. In other words, mashhūr reports could particularise and 
abrogate the Qurʾān and mutawātir reports but could not be particularised or 
abrogated by solitary reports.33
On the basis of this stipulation the Ḥanafīs rejected a solitary hadith 
prohibiting the sale of ripe dates for dry ones because they considered it 
to contradict the mashhūr hadith concerning ribā, which allowed the equal 
and simultaneous exchange of dates in general, without any differentiation 
between ripe and dry ones.34 They also included this reasoning in their rejec-
tion of the aforementioned hadith allowing the testimony of a single witness 
with an oath, since a mashhūr hadith specified that the plaintiff was required 
to present clear evidence (bayyinah) and that the accused could exonerate 
himself with an oath. Hence, allowing the plaintiff to confirm his claim 
with an oath would contradict the mashhūr hadith restricting the oath to the 
accused.35
4. Contradicting Consensus (ijmāʿ)
Ḥanafī jurists included several other stipulations for the acceptance of soli-
tary reports that the majority of schools considered to be mere theoretical 
propositions without practical implications in legal interpretation. Among 
these stipulations was that the report should not contradict ijmāʿ. Although 

  
Traditionists and Jurisprudents  
[ 137
the concept of ijmāʿ was eventually acknowledged by jurists of all schools, 
early hadith critics were wary of it insofar as it was often used to assert 
the primacy of local, inherited tradition against competing opinions. It was 
with such assertions in mind that al-Shāfiʿī claimed that consensus could 
not occur in contradiction to the Sunnah.36 Ibn Ḥanbal’s expression of 
doubt concerning the occurrence of ijmāʿ was likewise interpreted by Ibn 
Taymīyah as an expression of frustration with unfounded claims of ijmāʿ 
asserted in the face of hadith reports that had not gained traction in a given 
local context.37
In spite of such pronouncements on the part of the earliest exponents of 
the traditionalist schools, by the fifth/eleventh century, Shāfiʿī and Ḥanbalī 
legal theorists representative of the rationalist–traditionalist détente listed 
non-contradiction with ijmāʿ as an explicit condition for the acceptance of 
solitary reports.38 Even hadith critics like al-Khaṭīb al-Baghdādī followed 
suit.39 It seems that for most theorists, however, this condition represented 
little more than a mental exercise that helped to clarify the interlocking 
hierarchy of legal evidence. Imām al-Ḥaramayn al-Juwaynī (d. 478/1085) 
even entertained the possibility of contradiction between consensus and 
a mutawātir hadith, stating that consensus would take precedence since 
the ruling indicated by the hadith could be subject to abrogation.40 Imām 
al-Ḥaramayn quickly followed this statement by noting that the issue was 
merely hypothetical and that one should not allow oneself to get carried 
away with such propositions.41
The tenor of the discussion among the Ḥanafīs was considerably different. 
It is already clear that the Ḥanafīs were invested in defending the multi- 
layered and cumulative conception of Sunnah against the exclusive author-
ity of hadith, and ijmāʿ was one tool that could be used for this purpose. 
Al-Jaṣṣāṣ considered the precedence of ijmāʿ over solitary reports to be the 
subject of consensus in itself, again with reference to the certain nature of 
consensus and the probabilistic nature of solitary reports. Due to its certain 
nature, ijmāʿ could be grounds for dismissing solitary reports, but also for 
raising a ruling conveyed via a solitary report to the level of certainty.42
5. Solitary Hadiths Concerning Issues of General Concern
Another issue that divided the Ḥanafīs from the majority was whether a 
solitary hadith could be rejected because a single narrator transmitted some-
thing that ought to have been of general knowledge or concern. Once again, 
legal theorists of all schools discussed a category of reports that could be 
rejected on these grounds, but treated it more as an epistemological exercise 
than as a principle with any significant bearing on legal interpretation. Non-
Ḥanafīs reasoned that major public events, such as civil strife or the dramatic 
death of a famous person in a large crowd, could not be reported by a single 
individual alone, and that if this were to occur, that individual would be 
proven a liar.43

 138 ] 
Mutaz al-Khatib
The Ḥanafīs extended this reasoning to solitary hadith reports on legal and 
ritual matters under the rubric of what they referred to as ʿumūm al-balwá.44 
The majority was willing to admit this standard with respect to the broadest 
rules, such as the obligation to pray five times a day, but did not believe that 
it applied to more detailed matters. Thus, a solitary report claiming that there 
are six daily prayers would be rejected, but not a solitary report pertaining to 
how the prayer should be performed.45 The Ḥanafīs, however, believed that 
any ritual or legal teaching that all Muslims would need to know about could 
be rejected if it was conveyed only via a solitary report.
Application of this principle resulted in the Ḥanafīs rejecting several 
hadiths that were accepted by the other schools. They rejected a hadith nar-
rated by a woman indicating that touching one’s penis negated ablutions, 
reasoning that all men needed to know this ruling and that it could not truly 
go back to the Prophet if it was only narrated by a single woman.46 On similar 
grounds they rejected hadiths concerning reciting the basmala out loud in 
prayer, raising the hands after rukūʿ, the need to perform ablutions after con-
suming something touched by fire, and the need to perform ablutions after 
carrying a bier.47
6. Hadiths Contradicting Qiyās
Jurists of all schools discussed the notion of rejecting solitary reports that 
violated ‘analogy’ (qiyās) or ‘analogy to principles’ (qiyās al-uṣūl). This notion 
was the subject of both vigorous disagreement, even within schools, and 
considerable misunderstanding. The crux of the issue was what exactly 
was meant by qiyās or qiyās al-uṣūl, terms that were used interchangeably 
to a large extent. Although discussions of the issue in works of legal theory 
are extensive and diverse, as a general rule, it is fair to say that those who 
favoured this principle and those who opposed it were in fact referring to 
two different ideas.
Those opposed to rejecting hadiths on the basis of qiyās tended to think 
of qiyās as the familiar process of drawing an analogy between an issue for 
which there was no explicit textual indication and an issue for which there 
was an explicit textual indication, giving them the same ruling. On this basis, 
they argued that rejecting solitary reports on the basis of qiyās was obviously 
illegitimate, since it was in effect subordinating rulings established by the 
principal textual sources to rulings that were secondary to and derivative of 
those same sources. This understanding underpinned Shafiʿī and Ḥanbalī 
polemics against the possibility of rejecting solitary reports on the basis of 
qiyās.48
A careful reading of the arguments of scholars who accepted the possibil-
ity of such rejection, chiefly Ḥanafīs and some Mālikīs, reveals that they used 
the terms qiyās and qiyās al-uṣūl in this context to refer to something other 
than the specific juristic tool of qiyās that extended a textual ruling to a new 
case through analogy. For these scholars, the term ‘al-uṣūl’ seems to have 

  
Traditionists and Jurisprudents  
[ 139
referred to basic, non-negotiable principles of law, akin to what one finds 
in the genre of legal maxims (qawāʿid fiqhīyah).49 Solitary hadiths could be 
rejected if they clashed with such principles, which were considered to be 
widely and indisputably grounded in the principal textual sources of the 
law.50 Thus, responding to the arguments of those who rejected the validity 
of qiyās al-uṣūl, al-Qarāfī (d. 684/1285) wrote, ‘The texts on which the qiyās is 
based are not the same as the text over which the qiyās has been given prec-
edence, so there is no contradiction.’51 In other words, the proponents of this 
practice stressed the authority of principles that could be rooted in an array 
of texts over the authority of individual texts themselves.
Ultimately, this dispute brought into relief two differing conceptions of 
how hadith criticism was best carried out. Proponents of qiyās al-uṣūl high-
lighted the factors that gave rise to uncertainty in solitary reports, such as 
the widespread practice of narrating hadiths by paraphrase (al-riwāyah bi-al-
maʿná) and the differing levels of understanding (fiqh) possessed by different 
narrators. Because of such uncertainty, it was entirely reasonable to reject 
solitary reports that contradicted principles that were widely agreed on and 
rooted in more than a single text.52 Specifying the exact point of disagree-
ment, al-Sarakhsī wrote that ‘If it is known for certain that [the report] was 
heard from the Messenger of God in a manner that contradicts qiyās and 
there are no grounds for suspicion concerning its transmission, then it is as if 
we had heard it from the Messenger of God and are required to leave aside 
any kind of qiyās in favour of [the report].’53 Similarly, while the opponents 
of qiyās al-uṣūl agreed regarding the uncertain nature of solitary reports in 
theory, in practice they were reluctant to admit the suspicions raised by its 
proponents into their evaluation of hadith reports, which may account in 
part for their insistence on equating the practice with giving precedence to 
derivative forms of evidence over primary forms.
Aside from the overwhelming rejection of qiyās al-uṣūl among Shāfiʿīs and 
Ḥanbalīs, there was no final agreement, even within schools, on exactly when 
this practice was legitimate. Some Ḥanafīs, such as al-Asmandī (d. 552/1157) 
and Ibn al-Humām (d. 861/1457), held that each case of contradiction should 
be treated individually on the basis of full consideration of the relevant evi-
dence.54 This was also the position of some Muʿtazilī legal theorists, such 
as Abū al-Ḥusayn al-Baṣrī (d. 436/1044).55 Perhaps the majority of Ḥanafīs, 
including figures such as ʿĪsá ibn Abān, al-Bazdawī and al-Sarakhsī, stipu-
lated that solitary reports be rejected on this basis whenever the narrator was 
not a jurist.56 Some of the most influential figures of the Mālikī school, includ-
ing al-Qarāfī and al-Shāṭibī (d. 790/1388), held that qiyās al-uṣūl always took 
precedence over solitary reports, but this was hardly the subject of agree-
ment within the school.57 Al-Bājī (d. 474/1081), Ibn al-Ḥājib (d. 646/1249) 
and al-Tilimsānī (d. 771/1369) all held that the correct position of the school 
was to prefer solitary reports over qiyās with some limited exceptions.58
Like the issues discussed above, the problem of qiyās al-ūṣūl is clarified 
further in its practical application. The Ḥanafīs and Mālikīs argued that this 

 140 ] 
Mutaz al-Khatib
form of reasoning was already implicitly ratified in the time of the compan-
ions. They cited a report in which Ibn ʿAbbās rejected a hadith stating that 
upon waking from sleep, one must wash one’s hands before dipping them 
into a water container for ablutions, which was narrated by Abū Hurayrah. 
Ibn ʿAbbās reasoned that many people’s water containers were too heavy 
to tip over, and extracting water from them without dipping one’s hands 
in them therefore clashed with the basic principle of removing unnecessary 
hardship.59 Another hadith rejected by the Ḥanafīs was known as ḥadīth 
al-muṣarrāh, which referred to the under-handed practice of selling livestock 
after confining milk in their udders to make them seem more full. According 
to the hadith, also narrated by Abū Hurayrah, once the buyer realised that 
he had been duped after milking the animal, he was allowed to either keep 
the animal or return it along with a certain amount of dates to compensate 
for the milk. The Ḥanafīs held that this violated more basic legal principles, 
such as the principle that benefiting from any property entailed undertaking 
responsibility for it (al-kharāj bi-al-ḍamān) and the prohibition of the unequal 
exchange of staple foods under the category of ribā.60
7. Hadiths Contradicting Inherited Tradition
Similar to their consideration of the communal reception of hadiths, the 
Ḥanafīs and Mālikīs also took widespread practices handed down across 
generations as a standard against which to measure the authority of hadith 
reports. In general terms, the Ḥanafī sense of inherited tradition was more 
nebulous than that of the Mālikīs. We have already seen that early Ḥanafī 
jurists like Abū Yūsuf and ʿĪsá ibn Abān took the communal reception of 
hadith reports into consideration in determining their applicability. One 
aspect of this was examining whether hadiths were acted upon by recognised 
authorities among early generations. Early Ḥanafīs such as ʿĪsá ibn Abān rea-
soned that if the majority of such figures failed to act upon a given hadith, 
it must have been abrogated or incorrectly reported. Assuming  otherwise 
would mean that these early authorities had deliberately contradicted the 
Prophet’s teachings, which was absurd and would entail undermining 
the reliability of the majority of those who passed on the Prophet’s teach-
ings to begin with.61 Later Ḥanafīs specified that this applied only to issues 
that would have been widely practised, as detailed above.62 An example of 
how this standard was applied in practice is the report of al-Barāʾ ibn ʿĀzib 
(d. 72/691–2) concerning the qunūt supplication in the morning (fajr) and 
evening (maghrib) prayers.63 The Ḥanafīs rejected the report because it was 
not widely practised.64
In principle, the Ḥanafī sense of inherited practice against which they 
measured hadith reports was not geographically restricted. They went so 
far as to specify that an inherited practice in any city in which a significant 
number of Companions and Followers (tābiʿīn) settled was authoritative.65 
This stood in sharp contrast to the Mālikīs, who famously held that ‘the praxis 

  
Traditionists and Jurisprudents  
[ 141
of the people of Medina’ (ʿamal ahl al-madīnah) were a more authoritative 
source than solitary hadith reports. The precise sense of ʿamal ahl al-madīnah 
was implicit in the usage of the early generations of the Mālikī school.66 By 
the time of al-Qāḍī ʿAbd al-Wahhāb (d. 422/1031), al-Bājī and al-Qāḍī ʿIyāḍ 
(d. 544/1149), the mature discourse of Mālikī legal theory divided ʿamal into 
two types.67 The first type is revelation-based issues transmitted and sup-
ported by actions that were passed down and practised by overwhelming 
numbers of people since the time of the Prophet (mā ṭarīquhu al-naql wa-ittaṣal 
al-ʿamal bihi), so al-madīnah as a place itself is not meant. This type includes 
saying, doing and not doing widely practised issues such as the call to prayer 
(adhān), the iqāmah, al-ṣāʿ, not taking zakāh from vegetables in spite of its efflu-
ent in Medina, and not reciting aloud ‘bi-ism Allāh al-Raḥmān al-Raḥīm’. The 
Mālikīs agreed that this category of ʿamal was authoritative enough to over-
ride solitary reports. According to al-Qāḍī ʿIyāḍ, it constituted:
a proof whose authority must be accepted, and against which conflicting evi-
dence such as solitary reports and analogy must be set aside, since this [type of] 
transmission is beyond doubt. It yields certain knowledge and therefore should 
not be set aside in favour of something that is merely likely.68
Even beyond the confines of the Mālikī school, some Shāfiʿīs including Abū 
Bakr al-Ṣayrafī (d. 330/942) and some Ḥanbalīs, including Ibn Taymīyah and 
Ibn Qayyim al-Jawzīyah, considered this notion of ʿamal to be authoritative 
within a limited scope that understands the concept of ʿamal as something 
commonly narrated when it contradicts a single narration.69 The second type 
of ʿamal is the ijtihād of the Companions that was passed down to subsequent 
generations. The majority of Mālikīs did not give this type of ʿamal prece-
dence over solitary reports, although many North Africans and Andalusians 
did.70 Perhaps the best known example of a hadith that the Mālikīs rejected 
based on ʿamal is the hadith of Ibn ʿUmar that states that the two parties to 
a sale may cancel it until they part from each another. The hadith was nar-
rated by Mālik himself via an unassailable isnād, but he rejected its apparent 
 implications because the people of Medina did not follow it in practice.71
Generally speaking, it is obvious that the Shāfiʿīs were opposed to measur-
ing hadith reports against inherited tradition. The notion of ʿamal was far too 
nebulous for al-Shāfiʿī, who addressed his erstwhile teacher Mālik saying, 
‘We still do not know what you mean by ʿamal to this day, and I doubt 
that we ever shall.’72 However, just as Ḥanafī and Mālikī jurists sharpened 
their respective notions of ʿamal over time, later Shāfiʿī jurists admitted that 
inherited tradition deserved consideration alongside hadith reports within a 
limited scope. Their aim was to harmonise the single hadith with the ʿamal of 
Medina and the practice of Companions when they appeared to contradict 
each other. This is based on the assumption that the Companions cannot 
have intentionally violated the prophetic hadith without reason. Imām 
al-Ḥaramayn and al-Ghazālī argue that if it was established with certainty 

 142 ] 
Mutaz al-Khatib
that authoritative figures among the Companions were aware of a hadith and 
did not act upon it and its meaning was decisive (wa-kāna al-khabar naṣṣan lā 
yataṭarraqu ilayhi taʾwīl), the hadith would have to be considered abrogated.73 
Although this position echoes that of the Ḥanafīs, the Shāfiʿī theorists were 
reluctant to concede too much ground to their opponents and were careful to 
couch concessions in reasoning that was acceptable to their tradition-based 
school. Imām al-Ḥaramayn wrote that ‘what we mentioned here is not giving 
their [i.e., the Companions’] rulings precedence over the report. It is nothing 
more than holding fast to the ijmāʿ concerning interpreting their actions in a 
manner that renders them correct, so it is as if we have resorted to consensus 
in contradistinction to the hadith.’74
Summary and Conclusions
This investigation of matn criticism among hadith critics and jurists further 
weakens the claim that classical Muslim scholars ignored such criticism in 
their evaluation of hadith reports, revealing it to be an over-generalisation 
or a hasty judgement based on an incomplete survey of the various genres 
in which hadith criticism was debated and carried out. It is clear that even 
Ḥanbalīs and Shāfiʿīs could state unflinchingly that ‘irrational’ hadiths could 
not be accepted, even if the conception of reason brought to bear on the 
hadith corpus did not automatically exclude the material deemed ahistorical 
by the Orientalists. We have also seen that hadith critics were not averse to 
pointing out logical and chronological inconsistencies in formally authentic 
reports, even if this never constituted a central concern of their discipline.
In addition to substantiating the practice of matn criticism among classical 
hadith critics and jurists, this chapter highlights how the different discipli-
nary concerns of these two groups led to different approaches to matn criti-
cism. Hadith critics were concerned primarily with concurrent investigations 
of the isnād and the matn that would allow them to draw detailed conclusions 
regarding several interrelated questions. On the one hand, they attempted to 
assess the reliability of individual hadiths or some of their components by 
applying the criteria set out above. At the same time, the sum total of their 
assessments of individual hadiths allowed them to draw conclusions con-
cerning the reliability, memorisation and precision of particular narrators. 
Isnād and matn criticism, in other words, were deeply intertwined for hadith 
critics insofar as both ultimately rested on a broad, comparative survey of 
the hadith corpus that identified correlations between particular figures in 
the isnād and consistency or lack thereof in the contents of hadiths. The com-
parative methods employed by hadith scholars also enabled them to detect 
logical and chronological contradictions within the hadith corpus.
The jurists’ approach to matn criticism was framed less in terms of authen-
ticity as such, and more in terms of the issue of applicability. This broad 
conceptual difference was common to the genre of legal theory across all 
four Sunni schools, but the schools differed widely in terms of their practical 

  
Traditionists and Jurisprudents  
[ 143
approximation to the methods of hadith critics. The Shāfiʿīs and Ḥanbalīs 
added little to the approach of hadith critics by way of matn criticism and 
were largely content to allow formally authentic hadiths to stand as legal 
evidence. To the extent that they admitted criteria external to the methods 
of hadith critics, they considered them to be largely theoretical propositions 
without much practical impact on jurisprudential deliberations. Weighing 
formally sound hadith reports against most other forms of evidence was, for 
these jurists, tantamount to rejecting revelation in favour of faulty human 
reason.
The Mālikīs and Ḥanafīs, however, held that it was necessary to weigh 
formally sound solitary hadith reports against other forms of evidence before 
concluding that such reports should be considered reflective of revelation 
to begin with. In insisting on this process of verification through criteria 
external to the hadith corpus, the Mālikīs and Ḥanafīs were emphasising 
the mediated and fallible nature of hadith reports, which they believed were 
subject to human error as long as they were not transmitted on a massive 
scale. Underlying their concern with applicability, in other words, was a 
conception of authenticity that was informed by a greater degree of scepti-
cism and more diverse criteria than those of both Shāfiʿī and Ḥanbalī jurists 
and hadith critics. As noted by Wael Hallaq, this emphasis on the mediated 
and fallible nature of formally sound isnāds is perhaps a point of limited cor-
respondence between classical Muslim and modern Western approaches to 
analysing hadith.75
From the fifth/eleventh century onwards, certain shifts took place in the 
relationship between the methodologies of hadith critics and jurists. At the 
level of theory, later traditionists adopted certain conditions for accepting 
hadith reports from the discipline of legal theory, as shown by their inclusion 
of categories like contradiction of reason, the Qurʾān, ijmāʿ and tawātur in 
manuals of ʿulūm al-ḥadīth, called ʿalāmāt al-waḍʿ. These categories, however, 
seem to have had little effect on the actual practice of matn criticism among 
later hadith critics and the real application for this is to be found in the genre 
of forged hadith (al-mawḍūʿāt), narrations by weak narrators or contrivers, 
such as the books of al-Jūraqānī, Ibn al-Jawzī and Ibn Qayyim al-Jawzīyah.76
On the other side, the uṣūlīs, including Shāfiʿīs and Ḥanbalīs, have agreed 
that the hadith that contradicts axiomatic knowledge (badahīyāt al-ʿuqūl) 
or certain meaning (al-ʿilm al-qaṭʿī) should be disregarded. However, they 
disagree about how to apply this to single hadiths. Obviously, the Ḥanafī 
approach has left its effects on discussions. The Ḥanafī and Mālkī tradition-
ist-jurisprudents, nonetheless, were more influenced by their profession than 
by their legal affiliation, especially when they wrote in two genres: takhrīj of 
the legal hadiths (aḥādīth al-aḥkām) of their legal schools, and the genre of 
sciences of hadith (ulūm al-ḥadīth). Writing in these genres was deeply influ-
enced by the Shāfiʿī approach, especially the work of Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ and Ibn 
Ḥajar, who developed the most full-blown theory of hadith sciences. These 
developments, however, left no practical impact on the legal practice of other 

 144 ] 
Mutaz al-Khatib
legal schools.77 Thus, in spite of a certain kind of theoretical convergence 
between the notions of matn criticism operative among later hadith critics 
and jurists, the practice of matn criticism among the two groups remained 
distinctive because of the essential disagreements in the legal practice 
between the four Sunni schools.
Notes
 1. For one critique, see Jonathan A. C. Brown, ‘How We Know Early Ḥadīth Critics 
Did Matn Criticism and Why It’s So Hard to Find’, Islamic Law and Society 15 
(2008): 143–84, at 146–8.
 2. On debates over matn criticism in modern Muslim scholarship, see Daniel W. 
Brown, Rethinking Tradition in Modern Islamic Thought (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1996), 95–100, 112–32 and passim; Jonathan A. C. Brown, 
‘The Rules of Matn Criticism: There Are No Rules’, Islamic Law and Society 19 
(2012): 356–96, at 384–94; Mutaz al-Khatib, Radd al-ḥadīth min jihat al-matn: 
dirāsah fī manāhij al-muḥaddithīn wa-al-uṣūlīyīn (Beirut: al-Shabakah al-ʿArabīyah 
fi al-Abḥāth wa-al-Nashr, 2011), 17–25, 227–31.
 3. The major works in this regard are Muṣṭafā al-Sibāʿ ī, al-Sunnah wa-makānatuhā 
fī al-tashrīʿ, PhD thesis, al-Azhar University, Cairo, 1949, and Nūr al-Dīn ʿItr, 
Manhaj al-naqd fī ʿulūm al-ḥadīth (Damascus: Dār al-Fikr, 1972). Al-Sibāʿī focused 
on ʿalāmāt waḍʿ al-ḥadīth; ʿItr reformulated ʿulūm al-ḥadīth to show that the 
method of hadith criticism is comprehensive and covers both isnād and matn. It 
is also important to mention Ẓafar Aḥmad al-Tahānawī (d. 1394/1974), Qawāʿid 
fī ʿulūm al-ḥadīth (the first edition was in India in 1930), a manual focused on the 
Ḥanafī contribution to matn criticism.
 4. The notion of collecting Ṣaḥābah matn criticism started with ʿAbd al-Muḥsin ibn 
Ṭāhir al-Baghdādī (d. 489/1096), who collected a small number of reports. Badr 
al-Dīn al-Zarkashī (d. 794/1392) dedicated to it an important work published 
as al-Ijābah li-īrād mā istadrakathu ʿĀʾishah ʿalá al-ṣaḥābah, ed. Saʿīd al-Afghānī 
(Damascus: al-Maṭbaʿah al-Hāshimīyah, 1939), later summarised by Jalāl al-Dīn 
al-Suyūṭī (d. 911/1505) in ʿAyn al-iṣābah. For a critical analysis of these examples, 
see al-Khatib, Radd al-ḥadīth, 179–209.
 5. The early works in this regard are Ṣalāḥ al-Dīn al-Idlibī, Manhaj naqd al-matn 
ʿinda ʿulamāʾ al-ḥadīth (Beirut: Manshūrāt Dār al-Āfāq al-Jadīdah, 1983), Musfir 
al-Dumaynī, Maqāyīs Ibn al-Jawzī fī naqd mutūn al-sunnah min khilāl kitābihi 
al-Mawḍūʿāt (Jeddah: Dār al-Madanī, 1984), and Ṣalāḥ al-Dīn al-Idlibī, Maqāyīs 
naqd mutūn al-sunnah (Riyadh: Maktabat al-ʿUlūm wa-al-Ḥikam, 1995).
 6. For more details, see al-Khatib, Radd al-ḥadīth, 237–71.
 7. Ibn Rajab al-Ḥanbalī, Sharḥ ʿilal al-Tirmidhī, 1:425.
 8. Muslim, Kitāb al-Tamyīz, 189; Ibn Rajab al-Ḥanbalī, Sharḥ ʿilal al-Tirmidhī, 418–19. 
For a detailed explanation of why the issue cannot be reduced to any particular 
standard, see al-Zaylaʿī, Naṣb al-rāyah fī takhrīj aḥādīth al-Hidāyah, ed. Muḥammad 
ʿAwwāmah, 5 vols (Jeddah: Dār al-Qiblah lil-Thaqāfah al-Islāmīyah, etc., n.d.), 
1:336–7.

  
Traditionists and Jurisprudents  
[ 145
 9. Al-Khatib, Radd al-ḥadīth, 116–17, 277–8. Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ, for example, did not dif-
ferentiate between munkar and shādhdh. See Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ, ʿUlūm al-ḥadīth, ed. Nūr 
al-Dīn ʿItr (Damascus: Dār al-Fikr, 1986), 76; Ibn Ḥajar, al-Nukat 2:674.
10. On muḍṭarib and mukhtalif reports, see Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ, Introduction, 71–2 and 205–6, 
respectively.
11. Abū Isḥāq al-Shīrāzī, al-Lumaʿ fī uṣūl al-fiqh (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 
1985), 45; al-Khaṭib al-Baghdādī, al-Faqīh wa-al-mutafaqqih, ed. ʿĀdil Yūsuf 
al-ʿAzzāzī, 2 vols (Riyadh: Dār Ibn al-Jawzī, 2000), 1:354. See also al-Khaṭīb 
al-Baghdādī, al-Kifāyah fī ʿilm al-riwāyah, ed. Aḥmad ʿUmar Hāshim (Beirut: Dār 
al-Kitāb al-ʿArabī, 1986), 33, 472; Ibn al-Jawzī, Kitāb al-mawḍūʿāt min al-aḥādīth 
al-marfūʿāt, ed. Nūr al-Dīn ibn Shukrī ibn ʿAlī, 4 vols (Riyadh: Maktabat Aḍwāʾ 
al-Salaf, 1997), 1:151.
12. This can be understood through two indications: first, their expressions such as 
mūjibāt al-ʿuqūl, muqtaḍá al-ʿaql, mā tadfaʿu al-ʿuqūl ṣiḥḥatahu bi-mawḍūʿihā; sec-
ondly, their examples for this type of hadith.
13. See, for example, al-Jaṣṣāṣ, al-Fuṣūl fī al-uṣūl, ed. ʿUjayl Jāsim al-Nashmī, al-Turāth 
al-islāmī 14, 4 vols (Kuwait: Wizārat al-Awqāf wa-al-Shuʾūn al-Islāmīyah, 1994), 
3:122.
14. Al-Kalwadhānī, al-Tamhīd fī uṣūl al-fiqh, ed. Mufīd Abū ʿAmshah, 4 vols (Riyadh: 
Umm al-Qurā University 1985), 3:147–8; Muḥammad ibn ʿAbd al-Ḥamīd 
al-Asmandī, Badhl al-naẓar fī al-uṣūl, ed. Muḥammad Zakī ʿAbd al-Barr (Cairo: 
Maktabat Dār al-Turāth, 1992), 460–1.
15. Al-Qāḍī Abū Bakr ibn al-ʿArabī defended the rational possibility of this hadith. 
See Ibn al-ʿArabī, al-ʿAwāṣim min al-qawāṣim, ed. ʿAmmār Ṭālibī (Cairo: Maktabat 
Dār al-Turāth, 1997), 236–9, and Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī, Fatḥ al-Bārī, 11:421. For 
the hadith, see among other places al-Bukhārī, Ṣaḥīḥ, k. al-tafsīr 19, No. 4730, and 
Muslim, Ṣaḥīḥ, k. al-jannah, bāb al-nār yadkhuluhā al-jabbārūn, No. 2850.
16. Al-Khaṭīb al-Baghdādī, al-Faqīh wa-al-mutafaqqih 1:374–96.
17. For this point, see Mutaz al-Khatib, ‘ʿArḍ al-hadith ʿalá al-Qurʾān: al-nashʾah 
wa-al-masār wa-al-taḥawwulāt’, in al-Manāhij al-ḥadīthah fī al-dars al-Qurʾānī 
(Beirut: Dār Madārik, 2011), 91–182.
18. In the mursal hadith the Prophet says, ‘Hadiths from me will proliferate, so 
whatever you find attributed to me in agreement with the Qurʾan is indeed 
from me, and whatever you find attributed to me that contradicts the Qurʾan 
is not in fact from me.’ In the marfūʿ hadith, the Prophet says, ‘Whenever you 
hear a narration attributed to me, you should consider and compare it with the 
Qurʾān. If it agrees with it, then it is from me; otherwise, it is not authentic.’ See 
Abū Yūsuf, al-Radd ʿalá siyar al-Awzāʿī, ed. Abū al-Wafā al-Afghānī (Hyderabad: 
Lajnat Iḥyāʾ al-Maʿārif al-Nuʿmānīyah, n.d.), 25. For criticism of the two hadiths, 
see al-Shāfiʿī, al-Umm, ed. Rifʿat Fawzī ʿAbd al-Muṭṭalib, 11 vols (Cairo: Dār 
al-Wafāʾ, 2001), 8:35; al-Shāfiʿī, al-Risālah, ed. Aḥmad Shākir (Cairo: Maṭbaʿat 
Muṣṭafā al-Bābī al-Ḥalabī 1940), 617–23; Abū ʿUmar ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, Jāmiʿ 
bayān al-ʿilm wa-faḍlihi, ed. Abū al-Ashbāl al-Zuhayrī, 2 vols (al-Dammam: Dār 
Ibn al-Jawzī, 1994), 2:1191; Ibn al-Jawzī, Mawḍūʿāt 1:420. The notion of stipulat-
ing agreement with the Qurʾān is not only the opinion of Ibrāhīm al-Nakhaʿī 

 146 ] 
Mutaz al-Khatib
(d. 96/714) and many Kufans, but is also attested in Ibāḍī and Shiʿi sources. See 
Muḥammad Rawwās Qalʿajī, Mawsūʿat fiqh Ibrāhīm al-Nakhaʿī, 2 vols (Egypt: 
Maṭābiʿ al-Hayʾah al-Miṣrīyah al-ʿĀmmah lil-Kitāb, 1979), 763–5, 772–4; al-Rabīʿ 
ibn Ḥabīb, al-Jāmiʿ al-ṣaḥīḥ (Oman: Wizārat al-Awqāf, 211), 15; Ibn Barakah, Kitāb 
al-jāmiʿ, ed. ʿĪsá Yaḥyá al-Bārūnī, 2 vols (Oman: Wizārat al-Turāth al-Qawmī 
wa-al-Thaqāfah, 1998), 1:279–80; Muḥammad ibn Yaʿqūb al-Kulaynī, Uṣūl al-kāfī, 
7 vols (Beirut: Manshūrāt al-Fajr, 2007), 1:40–1.
19. For the hadith, see among other places Abū Dāwūd, Sunan, k. al-sunnah 5, bāb fī 
luzūm al-sunnah, No. 4604, and Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal, Musnad 4:131 28:410–13.
20. Abū Yūsuf, al-Radd, 31.
21. For the classical discussion of the conception of Sunnah operative among the 
‘ancient schools’, see Joseph Schacht, On the Origins of Muḥammadan Jurisprudence 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1967), 21–35 and passim; Wael B. Hallaq, The Origins 
and Evolution of Islamic Law (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005), 
29–56, 102–21; ʿAbd al-Fattāḥ Abū Ghuddah, al-Sunnah al-nabawīyah wa-bayān 
madlūlihā al-sharʿī (Beirut: Dār al-Bashāʾir al-Islāmīyah, 1992).
22. Al-Shāfiʿī, al-Umm 9:194.
23. Schacht points out that these harmonising tools were also used by al-Shāfiʿī’s 
predecessors, but much more sparingly. See Schacht, Origins of Muḥammadan 
Jurisprudence, 23.
24. For more information about this treatise, see Abū Yaʿlá, Ṭabaqāt al-ḥanābilah, 
ed. 
Muḥammad 
Ḥāmid 
al-Fiqī, 
2 
vols 
(Cairo: 
Maṭbaʿat 
al-Sunnah 
al-Muḥammadīyah, 1952), 2:64–5; Ibn Taymīyah, Rafʿ al-malām ʿan al-aʾimmah 
al-aʿlām, ed. ʿAbd Allāh Ibrāhīm al-Anṣārī (Sidon: al-Maktabah al-ʿAṣrīyah, n.d.), 
32. Ibn Qayyim al-Jawzīyah sometimes quotes this treatise; e.g., Ibn al-Qayyim, 
Iʿlām al-muwaqqiʿīn ʿan rabb al-ʿālamīn, ed. Ṭāhā ʿAbd al-Raʾūf Saʿd, 4 vols (Beirut: 
Dār al-Jīl, 1973), 2:367.
25. On ʿĪsá ibn Abān and his refutation of al-Shāfiʿī, see Murteza Bedir, ‘An Early 
Response to Shāfiʿī: ʿĪsā b. Abān on the Prophetic Report (khabar)’, Islamic Law 
and Society 9(3) (2002): 285–311; Ahmed El-Shamsy, The Canonization of Islamic 
Law: a Social and Intellectual History (New York: Cambridge University Press, 
2013), 202–5; Muḥammad Zāhid al-Kawtharī, Bulūgh al-amānī fī sīrat al-imām 
Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥasan al-Shaybānī (Cairo: al-Maktabah al-Azharīyah lil-Turāth, 
1998), 49–50. On ‘Īsá’s contribution to the Ḥanafī legal school, see Haytham 
ʿAbd al-Ḥamīd Khaznah, Taṭawwur al-fikr al-uṣūlī al-ḥanafī (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub 
al-ʿIlmīyah, 2015), 116–28. Al-Jaṣṣāṣ is the most important source for ʿĪsá ibn 
Abān’s opinions since his works are no longer extant, but al-Nadīm lists five 
books written by him, for which see al-Nadīm, al-Fihrist, ed. Ayman Fuʾād 
Sayyid, 4 vols (London: Muʾassasat al-Furqān, 2009), 2:24–5.
26. Al-Jaṣṣāṣ, al-Fuṣūl fī ʿilm al-uṣūl, 1:174–5, 178, 183–4.
27. Al-Jaṣṣāṣ, al-Fuṣūl fī ʿilm al-uṣūl, 1:158–9, 168.
28. For the hadith of Fāṭimah bint Qays, see Muslim, Ṣaḥīḥ, k. al-ṭalāq 6, bāb 
al-muṭallaqah thalāthan lā nafaqah lahā, No. 1480. It is interesting that al-Bukhārī 
does not include this hadith in his Ṣaḥīḥ, but does dedicate a specific chapter 
under the title bāb qiṣṣat Fāṭimah bint Qays and cites two Qurʾānic verses (65:1, 

  
Traditionists and Jurisprudents  
[ 147
6) and narrates three hadith reports clarifying ʿĀʾishah’s critique of the report 
of Fatimah. For the Ḥanafī opinion, see al-Bazdawī, Uṣūl al-Bazdawī (Karachi: 
Maṭbaʿat Jāwīd Press, n.d), 175; al-Jaṣṣāṣ, al-Fuṣūl, 1:108, 114; al-Sarakhsī, 
Uṣūl al-Sarakhsī, ed. Abū al-Wafā al-Afghānī, 2 vols (Hyderabad: Lajnat Iḥyāʾ 
al-Maʿārif al-ʿUthmānīyah, 1973), 1:365. Motzki concludes that ‘there are defi-
nitely no sufficient grounds to dismiss the Fatima bint Qays story as the pure 
invention of this woman’: Harald Motzki, The Origins of Islamic Jurisprudence: 
Meccan Fiqh before the Classical Schools, trans. Marion H. Katz, Islamic History and 
Civilization: Studies and Texts, 41 (Leiden: Brill, 2002), 158–67.
29. For the hadith, see Muslim, Ṣaḥīḥ, k. al-aqḍiyah 2, bāb al-qaḍāʾ bi-al-yamīn wa-al-
shāhid, No. 1712. See al-Sarakhsī, Uṣūl 1:365-6; ʿAlāʾ al-Dīn al-Bukhārī, Kashf 
al-asrār ʿan uṣūl Fakhr al-Islām al-Bazdawī, ed. ʿAbd Allāh Maḥmūd Muḥammad 
ʿUmar, 4 vols (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 1997), 3:17–18.
30. Abū ʿUmar Yūsuf Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr, al-Tamhīd li-mā fī al-Muwaṭṭaʾ min al-asānīd, 
ed. Muṣṭafá al-ʿAdawī and Muḥammad ʿAbd al-Kabīr al-Bakrī, 20 vols (Morocco: 
Wizārat al-Awqāf wa-al-Shuʾūn al-Islāmīyah, 1967), 15:166. For the hadith, see 
Muslim, Ṣaḥīḥ, k. al-ṣayd wa-al-dhabāʾiḥ 3, bāb taḥrīm akl kull dhī nāb min al-sibāʿ 
wa-kull dhī mikhlab min al-ṭayr, No. 1932.
31. Abū Isḥāq Ibrāhīm ibn Mūsá al-Shāṭibī, al-Muwāfaqāt, ed. ʿAbd Allāh Darāz, 4 
vols (Cairo: Dār al-Fikr al-ʿArabī, n.d), 3:21; Muḥammad ibn Khalīfah al-Ubbī, 
Ikmāl Ikmāl a-muʿlim fī sharḥ Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim, ed. Muḥammad Sālim Ḥāshim, 9 
vols (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 1994), 2:58.
32. Al-Shāshī, Uṣūl al-Shāshī (Beirut: Dār al-Kitāb al-ʿArabī, 1982), 272; al-Bazdawī, 
Uṣūl, 152.
33. Al-Bazdawī, Uṣūl, 59; al-Sarakhsī, Uṣūl, 1:133.
34. Al-Sarakshī, Uṣūl 1:367; al-Dabbūsī, Taqwīm al-adillah fī uṣūl al-fiqh, ed. Khalīl 
al-Mays (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 2001), 188–9. For the solitary report, 
see Abū Dāwūd, Sunan, k. al-buyūʿ 18, bāb al-thamar bi-al-tamr, No. 3359; 
al-Tirmidhī, Sunan, k. al-buyūʿ 14, bāb mā jāʾa fī al-nahy ʿan al-muḥāqalah wa-al-
muzābanah, No. 1225; al-Nasāʾī, Mujtabá, k. al-buyūʿ 36, bāb ishtirāʾ al-tamr bi-al-
ruṭab, Nos 4545–6. For the mashhūr report, see al-Bukhārī, Ṣaḥīḥ, k. al-buyūʿ 74, bāb 
bayʿ al-tamr bi-al-tamr, No. 2170; Muslim, Ṣaḥīḥ, k. al-musāqāh 15, bāb al-ṣarf wa-bayʿ 
al-dhahab bi-al-wariq naqdan, Nos 1586–8.
35. Al-Dabbūsī, Taqwīm, 198; al-Sarakhsī, Uṣūl 1:367. For the mashhūr hadith accepted 
by the Ḥanafīs, see al-Bukhārī, Ṣaḥīḥ, k. al-rahn 16, bāb idhā ikhtalafa al-rāhin wa-
al-murtahin wa-naḥwahu fa-al-bayyinah ʿalá al-muddaʿī wa-al-yamīn ʿalá al-muddaʿá 
ʿalayh, No. 2514, and Muslim, Ṣaḥīḥ, k. al-aqḍiyah 1, bāb al-yamīn ʿalá al-muddaʿā 
ʿalayh, No. 1711.
36. Al-Shāfiʿī, al-Risālah, 322. See also the comments of Schacht, Origins of 
Muḥammadan Jurisprudence, 88–95.
37. For Ibn Ḥanbal’s expression of doubt concerning the occurrence of ijmāʿ, see 
Ibn Ḥazm, al-Iḥkām fī uṣūl al-aḥkām, 8 vols (Cairo: Dār al-Ḥadīth, 1984), 4:573. 
For Ibn Taymīyah’s explanation of the statement, see Taqī al-Dīn Aḥmad Ibn 
Taymīyah, al-Fatāwá al-kubrá, ed. Muḥammad ʿAbd al-Qādir ʿAṭā and Muṣṭafá 
ʿAbd al-Qādir ʿAṭā, 6 vols (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 1987), 6:286–7.

 148 ] 
Mutaz al-Khatib
38. Al-Shīrāzī, Lumaʿ, 45; al-Kalwadhānī, Tamhīd 3:150; al-Zarkashī, al-Baḥr al-muḥīṭ, 
ed. ʿAbd al-Qādir ʿAbd Allāh al-ʿĀnī, 6 vols (Kuwait: Wizārat al-Aqāf wa-al-
Shuʾūn al-Islāmīyah, 1988), 4:342.
39. Al-Khaṭīb, Kifāyah, 472.
40. Imām al-Ḥaramayn, al-Burhān fī al-uṣūl, ed. ʿAbd al-ʿAẓīm al-Dīb (Doha: Qatar 
University, 1979), 1169.
41. Imām al-Ḥaramayn, al-Burhān, 1175.
42. Al-Jaṣṣāṣ, Fuṣūl 1:175–8.
43. Al-Kalwadhānī, Tamhīd 3:151; al-Shīrāzī, Lumaʿ, 45; Imām al-Ḥaramayn, 
al-Burhān, 587; al-Zarkashī, Baḥr 3:342; Ibn ʿAbd al-Shakūr al-Bahārī, Musallam 
al-thubūt, in ʿAbd al-ʿAlī Muḥammad, Fawātiḥ al-raḥamūt, ed. ʿAbd Allāh Maḥmūd 
Muḥammad ʿUmar, 2 vols (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 2002), 2:155.
44. Al-Shashī, Uṣūl al-Shāshī, 1:284; al-Jaṣṣāṣ, al-Fuṣūl 2:293; al-Bukhārī, Kashf 3:16.
45. Imām al-Ḥaramayn, al-Burhān fī-l-uṣūl, 665–6; Muḥammad ibn ʿAlī ibn ʿUmar 
al-Māzarī, Īḍāḥ al-maḥṣūl min burhān al-uṣūl, ed. ʿAmmār al-Ṭālibī (Beirut: Dār al-
Gharb al-Islāmī, 2001), 522–3.
46. Al-Sarakhsī, Uṣūl 1:367. Hadiths to this effect were also attributed to several male 
companions, but the Ḥanafīs considered the chains of narration to be defective. 
See al-Bukhārī, Kashf 3:18. For the hadith, see among other places Abū Dāwud, 
Sunan, k. al-ṭahārah 68, bāb al-wuḍūʾ min mass al-dhakar, No. 181.
47. Al-Sarakhsī, Uṣūl 1:369; al-Bukhārī, Kashf 3:18.
48. Al-Shīrāzī, Lumaʿ, 39; al-Samʿānī, Qawāṭiʿ al-adillah fī uṣūl al-fiqh, ed. ʿAbd Allāh 
al-Ḥakamī, 5 vols (Riyadh: Maktabat al-Tawbah, 1998) 2:377–8; Abū Yaʿlá Ibn 
al-Farrāʾ, al-ʿUddah fī uṣūl al-fiqh, ed. Aḥmad ibn ʿAlī al-Mubārakī, 5 vols (Riyadh: 
n.p., 1990), 3:894; Ibn ʿAqīl, al-Wāḍiḥ fī uṣūl al-fiqh, ed. ʿAbd Allāh ibn ʿAbd 
al-Muḥsin al-Turkī, 5 vols (Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Risālah, 1999), 3:403. For more 
details about this discussion, see al-Khatib, Radd al-ḥadīth, 409, 427.
49. On the qawāʿid as both a legal tool and a literary genre, see Intisar Rabb, Doubt 
in Islamic Law: a History of Legal Maxims, Interpretation and Islamic Criminal Law 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2015); also a collective work, Maʿlamat 
Zāyid lil-qawāʿid al-fiqhīyah wa-al-uṣūlīyah, 41 vols (Abu Dhabi: Muʾassasat Zāyid, 
2013).
50. See, for example, al-Sarakhsī, Uṣūl 2:144; al-Jaṣṣāṣ, Fuṣūl 2:300, 306, 311, 313, 331, 
338. See also Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr’s use of the term al-uṣūl al-mujtamaʿ ʿalayhā in this 
context in al-Istidhkār, ed. Sālim al-ʿAṭṭār and Muḥammad ʿAlī Muʿawwaḍ, 9 vols 
(Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 2000), 6:116, 278, 475, 485, 504, 535–6, 7:326, 
8:548. See also the arguments of the present-day researcher al-Ḥājj Sālim, Mafhūm 
khilāf al-aṣl: dirāsah taḥlīlīyah fī ḍawʿ maqāṣid al-sharīʿah al-islāmīyah (Virginia: 
al-Maʿhad al-ʿĀlamī lil-Fikr al-Islāmī, 2008), 114–16, 153.
51. Al-Qarāfī, Sharḥ tanqīḥ al-fuṣūl fī ikhtiṣār al-maḥṣūl fī al-uṣūl (Beirut: Dār al-Fikr, 
2004), 301.
52. See the arguments in al-Bazdawī, Uṣūl, 159, and al-Sarakhsī, Uṣūl 2:342.
53. Al-Sarakhsī, Uṣūl 2:342.
54. Al-Asmandī al-Ḥanafī, Badhl, 474; Ibn Amīr al-Hājj, al-Taqrīr wa-al-taḥbīr, 3 vols 
(Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 1983), 2:299.

  
Traditionists and Jurisprudents  
[ 149
55. Al-Baṣrī, al-Muʿtamad fī uṣūl al-fiqh, ed. Khalīl al-Mays, 2 vols (Beirut: Dār al-
Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 1983), 2:166.
56. Al-Jaṣṣāṣ, Fuṣūl 3:127; al-Bazdawī, Uṣūl, 159; al-Sarakhsī, Uṣūl 2:342.
57. Shihāb al-Dīn al-Qarāfī, Sharḥ, 301; Shihāb al-Dīn al-Qarāfī, Nafāʾis al-uṣūl fī 
sharḥ al-maḥṣūl, ed. ʿĀdil ʿAbd al-Mawjūd and ʿAlī Muʿawwaḍ, 9 vols (Riyadh: 
Maktabat Nizār Muṣṭafā al-Bāz, 1995), 7:2984; al-Shāṭibī, Muwāfaqāt 3:21.
58. Al-Bājī, al-Minhāj fī tartīb al-ḥijāj, ed. ʿAbd al-Majīd Turkī (Beirut: Dār al-Gharb 
al-Islāmī, 1987), 124; Ibn al-Ḥājib, Muntahá al-uṣūl wa-al-amal fī ʿilmay al-uṣūl wa-
al-jadal (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 1985), 86–7; al-Tilimsānī, Miftāḥ al-wuṣūl 
ilá bināʾ al-furūʿ ʿalá al-uṣūl, ed. Muḥammad ʿAlī Farkūs (Beirut: Muʾassasat 
al-Rayyān, 1998), 322. See also the comments of Muḥammad al-Bashīr al-Ḥājj 
Sālim on Ibn al-Ḥājib in Mafhūm khilāf al-aṣl, 71–2.
59. Al-Jaṣṣāṣ, al-Fuṣūl 3:119–20; al-Asmandī, Badhl, 473; Amīr Bādishāh, Taysīr 
al-Taḥrīr, 4 vols in 2 (Cairo: Maṭbaʿat Muṣṭafá al-Bābī al-Ḥalabī, 1932), 3:118; 
al-Shāṭibī, Muwāfaqāt 3:20. For the hadith, see Muslim, Ṣaḥīḥ, k. al-ṭahārah 26, bāb 
karāhat ghams al-mutawaḍḍiʾ wa-ghayrihi yadahu fī al-ināʾ, No. 278; for criticism of 
this hadith, see Ibn Abī Shaybah, Muṣannaf 1:94; al-Bayhaqī, al-Sunan al-kubrá 
(Beirut: Dār al-Maʿrifah, 1992), 1:47.
60. Al-Bazdawī, Uṣūl al-Bazdawī, 159; al-Sarakhsī, Uṣūl 1:341; al-Shāshī, Uṣūl 276; 
al-Taftāzānī, Sharḥ al-Talwīḥ ʿalá al-Tawḍīḥ, 2 vols (Cairo: Maktabat Muḥammad 
ʿAlī Ṣubayḥ, n.d), 2:9; Amīr Bādishāh, Taysīr 3:52. For ḥadīth al-muṣarrāh, see 
among other places, al-Bukhārī, Ṣaḥīḥ, k. al-buyūʿ 64, bāb al-nahy lil-bāʾiʿ an 
lā yuḥaffila al-ibil wa-al-baqar wa-al-ghanam wa-kull muḥaffalah, No. 2148, and 
Muslim, Ṣaḥīḥ, k. al-buyūʿ 4, bāb taḥrīm bayʿ al-rajul ʿalá bayʿ akhīh, No. 1515. For 
ḥadīth al-kharāj bi-al-ḍamān, see among other places, Abū Dāwūd, Sunan, al-buyūʿ 
73, bāb fī man ishtará ʿabdan fa istaʿmalahu thumma wajada bihi ʿayban, No. 3508, 
al-Tirmidhī, Sunan, k. al-buyūʿ 53, bāb mā jāʾa fīman yashtarī al-ʿabd fa-yashtaghiluhu 
thumma yajidu bihi ʿayban, No. 1285.
61. Al-Dabbūsī, Taqwīm, 203.
62. Amīr Bādishāh, Taysīr 3:74; al-Sarakhsī, Uṣūl 2:3–11.
63. Ibn Khuzaymah, al-Ṣaḥīḥ, ed. Muḥammad Muṣṭafá al-Aʿẓamī, 4 vols (n.p.: al-
Maktab al-Islāmī, n.d.), 2:154.
64. Al-Jaṣṣāṣ, Fuṣūl 3:117.
65. Muḥammad Zāhid al-Kawtharī, Taʾnīb al-Khaṭīb ʿalá mā sāqahu fī tarjamat 
Abī Ḥanīfah min al-akādhīb, ed. Aḥmad Khayrī (Cairo: Maktabat al-Kullīyāt 
al-Azharīyah 1990), 300-1. See also al-Kawtharī, Fiqh ahl al-ʿirāq wa-ḥadīthuhum, 
ed. ʿAbd al-Fattāḥ Abū Ghuddah (Ḥalab: Maktab al-Maṭbūʿāt al-Islāmīyah, 
1970), 35, 37.
66. For a detailed exposition of ʿamal in the usage of Mālik and later adherents of 
his school, see Umar F. Abd-Allah Wymann-Landgraf, Mālik and Medina: Islamic 
Legal Reasoning in the Formative Period, Islamic History and Civilization, 101 
(Leiden: Brill, 2013), 219–506.
67. The opinion of al-Qāḍī ʿAbd al-Wahhāb was cited by al-Qarāfī, Nafāʾis al-uṣūl 
fī sharḥ al-Maḥṣūl, ed. ʿĀdil Aḥmad ʿAbd al-Mawjūd and ʿAlī Muḥammad 
Muʿawwaḍ, 9 vols (Mecca: Maktabat Nizār Muṣṭafá al-Bāz, 1997), 6:2710; 

 150 ] 
Mutaz al-Khatib
al-Bājī, Iḥkām al-fuṣūl fī aḥkām al-uṣūl, ed. ʿAbd al-Majīd Turkī, 2 vols (Beirut: 
Dār al-Gharb al-Islāmī, 1995), 1:486–8; al-Qāḍī ʿIyāḍ, Tartīb al-madārik wa-taqrīb 
al-masālik li-maʿrifat aʿlām madhhab Mālik, ed. Muḥammad ibn Tāwīt al-Ṭanjī, et al. 
(Rabat, etc.: various, 1966–83) 1:74. Wymann-Landgraf argues that Mālik’s refer-
ences to ʿamal make a series of fine (if not always precise) distinctions between 
the original sources of a given practice (i.e., Prophetic and post-Prophetic) as well 
as the various levels of consensus that existed among the Medinese authorities 
on a given issue. He also argues that these distinctions were often implicit and 
at times were even lost on later adherents of Mālik’s school. Important for our 
purposes is that he clarifies that the concern of ʿIyāḍ and later jurists to differenti-
ate between the various potential sources of ʿamal was reflected in Mālik’s own 
terminology, even if the neat distinctions that they made were not always easily 
distinguished in Mālik’s own usage, which took an intergenerational, layered 
notion of legal authority for granted. See Wymann-Landgraf, Mālik and Medina, 
232–8 and passim.
68. Al-Qāḍī ʿIyāḍ, Tartīb 1:68–9. See also al-Bājī, Iḥkām 1:488; al-Shāṭibī, Muwāfaqāt 
3:66–7.
69. Ibn Taymīyah, Majmūʿ 20:308; Ibn Qayyim al-Jawzīyah, Iʿlām 2:391–2; al-Zarkashī, 
Baḥr 6:253–4.
70. Al-Qāḍī ʿIyāḍ, Tartīb 1:69–70; al-Qarāfī, Nafāʾis 6:2710.
71. Ibn Rushd, Bidāyat al-mujtahid (Beirut: Dār al-Maʿrifah, 1982), 911; Ibn Rushd 
al-Jadd, al-Muqaddimāt al-mumahhidāt li-bayān mā iqtaḍathu rusūm al-Mudaw-
wanah min al-aḥkām al-sharʿīyāt wa-al-taḥṣīlāt al-muḥkamāt li-ummahāt masāʾilihā 
al-mushkilāt, ed. Muḥammad Ḥajjī and Saʿīd Aḥmad Aʿrāb, 3 vols (Beirut: Dar 
al-Gharb al-Islāmī, 1988), 2:95. Hadith Ibn ʿUmar is in Mālik, Muwaṭṭaʾ Mālik, k. 
al-buyūʿ, bāb bayʿ al-khiyār 2:671.
72. Al-Shāfiʿī, Umm 8:640.
73. Imām al-Ḥaramayn, Burhān, 1172; al-Ghazālī, al-Mankhūl fī taʿlīqāt al-uṣūl, ed. 
Muḥammad Ḥasan Hītū (Damascus: Dār al-Fikr, 1980), 431.
74. Imām al-Ḥaramayn, al-Burhān, 1172–3
75. Wael B. Hallaq, ‘The Authenticity of Prophetic Ḥadîth: a Pseudo-Problem’, 
Studia Islamica 89 (1999): 75–90.
76. For more details, see al-Khatib, Radd al-ḥadīth, 99–106, 212–26.
77. See al-Khatib, Radd al-ḥadīth, 25–6; 157–65. The manner in which the Sunni legal 
schools’ approaches to hadith evolved in response to al-Shāfiʿī’s thesis and the 
influence of the hadith movement over the centuries is a subject of perennial 
debate in Western scholarship and cannot be pursued in detail here. See, for 
example, Behnam Sadeghi, The Logic of Law-Making in Islam: Women and Prayer 
in the Legal Tradition (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013), 128–40; 
Christopher Melchert, ‘Traditionist-Jurisprudents and the Framing of Islamic 
Law’, Islamic Law and Society 8(3) (2001): 383–406; Abd-Allah, Mālik and Medina, 
507–17. On the other side ʿAbd al-Majīd Maḥmūd ʿAbd al-Majīd has studied fiqh 
ahl al-ḥadīth in the third/ninth century. ʿAbd al-Majīd, al-Ittijāhāt al-fiqhīyah ʿinda 
aṣḥāb al-ḥadīth fī al-qarn al-thālith al-hijrī (Cairo: Maktabat al-Khānjī 1979).

 [ 151 ]
CHAPTER
7
Hadith Criticism in the Levant in 
the Twentieth Century: From 
˙
za
¯hir 
al-isna
¯d to ʿilal al-
˙
hadi¯th
Ahmad Snober*
The hadith criticism movement in the Levant in the twentieth century was 
arguably one of the most active hadith movements in the Islamic world. 
Therein, ample work was produced and many prominent names emerged, 
such as Nāṣir al-Dīn al-Albānī (1914–99), ʿAbd al-Fattāḥ Abū Ghuddah (1917–
97), Shuʿayb al-Arnaʾūṭ (1928–2016), Nūr al-Dīn ʿItr (1934–) and Muḥammad 
ʿAwwāmah (1940–). The hadith movement in the Levant developed signifi-
cantly during the twentieth century and had a significant influence on other 
countries. It was characterised by clear ideological developments and doc-
trinal conflicts. The hadith movement in the Levant was also multi-faceted. 
Some scholars focused their attention on the written and oral transmission 
of hadith works, while others were concerned with the textual content of 
the hadith corpus and its exegesis. Certain specialists dedicated their efforts 
towards responding to Western criticisms and others towards hadith termi-
nology. Nevertheless, hadith criticism received the most attention. In this 
chapter I analyse the major trends of hadith criticism in the Levant, focusing 
on the methods of authenticating hadiths. Understanding these trends in the 
Levant is instrumental in comprehending the development of hadith criti-
cism in the Islamic world, since the Levant, with its intellectual and doctrinal 
diversity, has been an important centre of Islamic scholarship in general and 
the sciences of hadith in particular.
In this chapter, I argue that the common classification of hadith-criticism 
trends based on the doctrinal ideology of the scholar is uncritical and inac-
curate.1 The classification of hadith activity in the Levant should base its 
criteria solely on the methods of hadith criticism as this is the mechanism 
by which hadith criticism operates. Based on this, I demonstrate that there 
are two main trends. The first focuses on ẓāhir al-isnād (apparent dimension 
of the isnād) and adherence to the rules of the books of uṣūl al-ḥadīth. This 
approach is applied by al-Albānī, Abū Ghuddah and ʿItr, despite their dif-
ferent ideological commitments. This trend dominated the religious and 

 152 ] 
Ahmad Snober
academic atmosphere in the Levant for almost a century. Although they 
opposed al-Albānī doctrinally, Abū Ghuddah and ʿItr were generally con-
sistent in applying his method of hadith criticism. The second trend I discuss 
here is that of criticism based on evidence and subtle flaws (ʿilal al-ḥadīth), 
which appeared in Jordan in the 1980s through Hammām Saʿīd (1944–) at the 
University of Jordan, and was subsequently developed and formulated by 
Ḥamzah al-Mallībārī (1952–), who taught in the same university from 1996 
to 2000 and strongly propagated this trend. In the following pages, I first 
explore the history of hadith criticism in the Levant in the twentieth century 
and the emergence of al-Albānī’s school of hadith criticism. I then analyse 
Abū Ghuddah and ʿItr as models of hadith criticism in the Traditionalist 
school. Finally, I examine hadith criticism based on the subtle flaws and 
 evidence represented by Ḥamzah al-Mallībārī.
Hadith Criticism based on ẓāhir al-isnād (Nāṣir al-Dīn al-Albānī)
Damascus was known for its school of hadith in the eighth/fourteenth 
century, which was hardly paralleled by any other school of hadith and 
hadith criticism.2 However, the decline of this school began in the second half 
of the ninth/fifteenth century. Ibn-Nāṣir al-Dīn al-Dimashqī (d. 842/1438) in 
Damascus and Sibṭ Ibn al-ʿAjamī (d. 841/1437) in Aleppo had no notable suc-
cessors.3 Ibn Zurayq (d. 900/1494),4 who inherited their teaching, had only 
one notable student, Ibn Ṭūlūn (d. 953/1546), and both contributed little to 
the field of hadith criticism.5 The decline increased in intensity during the 
Ottoman rule of the Levant through the beginnings of the Arab Renaissance 
(al-nahḍah). This decline can be observed in several ways. We hardly find 
notable Levantine scholars exercising hadith criticism. Even those who were 
named in biographical works as hadith scholars simply transmitted some 
prominent books of hadith with a moderate engagement in commentary.6 
Also, books of hadith terminology that appeared in this period are generally 
of the commentary genre with minimal engagement with topics of hadith 
criticism. A contributing factor to that decline may be the minimal interest 
in hadith criticism in educational institutions in that era. For example, Dār 
al-Ḥadīth al-Ashrafīyah, the prominent historical school of hadith, remained 
in a state of decline for decades during the Ottoman era.7
Indeed, the religious learning environment of the Ottoman era did very 
little to encourage the study of hadith criticism and generally focused on 
traditional Sunni jurisprudential and doctrinal beliefs. It may be observed 
that hadith criticism generally flourishes in environments of intellectual and 
doctrinal struggle, where there are competing parties for authenticity and 
authority, particularly when a certain group gives utmost authority to the 
text. In such an environment, the text’s authenticity becomes prominent. This 
is usually not the case for groups that strictly adhere to traditional models of 
jurisprudence and theology. In the Ottoman era, we rarely find any group 
that passed over traditional schools of thought in order to deal with hadith 

  
Criticism in the Levant in the Twentieth Century  
[ 153
sources directly. Rather, the scholarly norm was inclined towards doctrinal 
imitation. Often, hadith was narrated simply for blessing (tabarruk) and not 
for deducing rulings,8 comparing evidence or critique of narrations even on 
a superficial level.9
Still, for many reasons, perhaps the most important of which was the intel-
lectual cultural movement in Egypt and what Isaac Wiseman called the ‘taste 
of modernity’, preliminary efforts in hadith science began to emerge at the 
hands of reform movements by the end of the nineteenth century. Works 
such as Ṭāhir al-Jazāʾirī (d. 1338/1920), Tawjīh al-naẓar ilá uṣūl al-athar, and 
Jamal al-Dīn al-Qāsimī (d. 1332/1914), Qawāʿid al-taḥdīth,10 may be charac-
terised as signs of a revival of hadith science as they came in a new form 
that was in contrast to the text-commentary style of scholarly writing in the 
Ottoman era. They also advocate their view that reference to hadith and 
compliance with its teachings is mandatory, therefore inciting interest in the 
study of hadith. Nevertheless, neither scholar was a hadith critic in the true 
sense of the word.11 Al-Qāsimī’s main concern was to reform the religious 
learning environment from one of traditional purism to one of critique. 
However, as he was not versed in the field of transmitter criticism, the influ-
ence of hadith terminology was not clear in his line of thought. Therefore, his 
appraisals of certain hadith reports were generally dependent on contempo-
rary hadith works such as al-Suyūṭī’s al-Jāmiʿ al-ṣaghīr and al-Jāmiʿ al-kabīr.12 
The most notable student of al-Qāsimī was Muḥammad Bahjah al-Bīṭār 
(d. 1976), who shared his teacher’s doctrinal orientation but did not write in 
the field of hadith sciences.
The attitude of al-Jazāʾirī and al-Qāsimī towards the predominant tradi-
tionalist environment was non-confrontational and their method of calling 
for reform did not engage directly with the scholarly or political state at the 
time. The situation shifted in the middle of the twentieth century with the 
emergence of al-Albānī as a hadith critic, directing his criticism towards 
the predominant traditionalist environment through the medium of hadith 
criticism, which was his most important tool that his counterparts lacked. 
The bold nature of al-Albānī’s criticism can be attributed to several elements 
pertinent to the intellectual landscape of his time. First, the reform movement 
at the end of the nineteenth century paved the way for perspectives that con-
tradicted the prevalent religious system in the Levant. Al-Albānī may have 
even attempted to align himself with this movement when he engaged in the 
evaluation and takhrīj (full referencing of hadiths with isnāds) of the hadith 
of some of its books, such as al-Qāsimī’s book on the reform of mosques, 
which indicates an interest in al-Qāsimī’s reformist project. Secondly, the 
relative intellectual freedom in the Levant in the early and middle twentieth 
century, especially in the face of the cultural developments witnessed in the 
region during that period, encouraged boldness. Intellectual discussions 
about nationalism, Arabism, Western civilisation, colonialism and secular-
ism were always present in cultural gatherings.13 Discussing these issues was 
a departure from the traditional religious form of education, thus weakening 

 154 ] 
Ahmad Snober
the authority of traditional scholars in such discussions and paving the path 
for many intellectuals and researchers from outside that circle. Thirdly, 
al-Albānī also possessed a bold personality from a young age, as he often 
related incidents in which he argued with his father on following schools of 
law, Sufism and other issues.14 Fourthly, there seemed to be a weak influence 
of political power on the academic environment during the time of al-Albānī. 
Towards the middle of the twentieth century, Damascus witnessed unique 
political freedom, which made it easier for scholars to contradict mainstream 
schools of thought and present their ideas without fear of persecution. If we 
compare this with the incident of the mujtahidūn at the end of the Ottoman 
era, when al-Qāsimī and a group of scholars were taken to court because 
they held gatherings in which they were accused of claiming themselves 
capable of independent legal reasoning (ijtihād), the difference between the 
two periods becomes obvious.15
These conditions made it possible for al-Albānī to call so strongly against 
the prevailing traditionalist school, compared with al-Jazāʾirī and al-Qāsimī. 
However, al-Albānī may not be regarded as extending al-Jazāʾirī and 
al-Qāsimī’s hadith methodology. Al-Albānī did not derive hadith knowl-
edge from that class of scholars and did not study these sciences under 
someone else’s tutelage.16 Rather, his association with hadith science came 
from Egypt. Al-Albānī mentions that he greatly admired the works of 
Muḥammad Rashīd Riḍā (d. 1935) in hadith criticism, especially with the 
complete absence of this science in Damascus and its circles of learning.17 
Hence, he was influenced by Rashīd Riḍā’s school and followed its method-
ology. Additionally, he was deeply interested in Aḥmad Shākir’s (d. 1958) 
work and praised him in several of his own writings.18
Al-Albānī was very active in propagating his ideas and gathering a number 
of students in Syria. Among the causes for the spread of his message, the fol-
lowing stand out. He was committed to the project: he travelled frequently 
to spread his ideas and was resolute therein.19 He also had strong ties with 
the Muslim Brotherhood at the beginning of his career as an active scholar. 
Under his influence, the Brotherhood of Damascus became closer to the Salafi 
school. Al-Albānī describes his relationship with the Brotherhood by saying 
that he was so connected that it was almost as if he had been one of them. 
Indeed, the majority of his students were from the Muslim Brotherhood not 
only in Damascus, but also in Lattakia, Aleppo and Idlib.20 His relationship 
with Muṣṭafá al-Sibāʿī (d. 1964) is well known. Al-Sibāʿī respected al-Albānī 
and included him in private meetings of the Brotherhood. When al-Muslimūn 
magazine (supervised by Saʿīd Ramaḍān, the son-in-law of Ḥasan al-Bannā, 
and Muṣṭafá al-Sibāʿī) relocated to Syria in 1954, any question concerning 
hadith was referred to al-Albānī. He also wrote several articles for that 
magazine.21 Al-Albānī then believed that the Brotherhood was the torch-
bearer of the Salafi message.22 Later, differences arose between him and the 
movement.23 A notable incident that reflects al-Albānī’s relationship with the 
Brotherhood relates to one of the first articles he wrote in their bi-monthly 

  
Criticism in the Levant in the Twentieth Century  
[ 155
magazine, The Muslim Brotherhood, in 1947. In the article, he commented on 
some of the hadiths mentioned by Sayyid Sābiq (d. 2000) in Fiqh al-Sunnah. 
The article was met with good reviews and even an encouraging letter from 
Ḥasan al-Bannā himself.24 Al-Albānī’s message was simple and touches upon 
the concerns of the public to whom his ideas were accessible. For example, he 
recalls that one of the issues that alienated him from the established scholarly 
community at that time was the issue of praying at graves. While he was still 
a young man, he discussed this with senior scholars of Damascus like Saʿīd 
al-Burhānī (d. 1967), to whom he wrote about it.25 This letter became the 
basis of al-Albānī’s treatise, Tahdhīr al-sājid. Al-Albānī aimed to show that the 
ruling on this issue could be easily inferred from several relevant hadiths and 
by judging the current practices of the masses.
Such an issue caused al-Albānī to turn to Wahhābī books on creed such as 
Kitāb al-Tawḥīd of Muḥammad ibn ʿAbd al-Wahhāb (d. 1792). He used such 
writings as textbooks in his teaching circles and as references in his works.26 
In 1954, when the Saudi traveller ʿAbd Allāh ibn Khamīs visited Damascus, 
he described al-Albānī’s sessions teaching books of Wahhābī theology, sur-
rounded by educated students, a clear sign of al-Albānī’s departure from the 
traditional norms of religious education in the Levant.27 It should be noted 
that al-Albānī began with issues that directly affected the community such 
as praying at graves, on which he published a book in 1958,28 Ādāb al-zifāf 
(wedding etiquette) in 1952,29 Jilbāb al-muslimah (‘Muslim Women’s Clothes’) 
in 1951,30 Ṣifat ṣalāt al-nabī (‘Description of the Prophet’s Prayer’) in 1950, and 
Aḥkām al-Janāʾiz (‘Rules of Funerals’) in 1954.31 He also wrote several articles 
for al-Tamaddun al-islāmī magazine, where he began writing in 1951. His 
first article therein was titled Wujūb al-tafaqquh fī al-ḥadīth (‘The Obligation 
to Study Hadith’). Thereafter, beginning in 1953, he wrote a series of arti-
cles addressing the negative impact of unreliable and forged hadiths on the 
Muslim community. He later began another series focusing on authentic 
hadiths.32
It should be noted that al-Albānī commonly addressed controversial 
topics, and in doing so was able to facilitate the dissemination of his message 
and attract the attention of young sections of society. Al-Albānī also utilised 
various means of communication in order to connect with the educated élite 
and the general public, particularly published written material. In contrast, 
al-Albānī’s opponents were generally not concerned with publishing; those 
who did publish focused primarily on interlinear commentaries and mar-
ginal glosses. While it is uncertain whether or not the Salafi movement of 
Saudi Arabia provided material support for al-Albānī during this time, their 
general support for spreading such ideas is well-known and is apparent 
in the written correspondence of al-Qāsimī and Maḥmūd Shukrī al-Ālūsī 
(d. 1924).33
In any case, the message of al-Albānī and his ideas spread widely in the 
Levant, especially since his Salafi thought called for holding on to the Qurʾān 
and the Sunnah and rejecting the adoption of traditional schools of law. 

 156 ] 
Ahmad Snober
Hadith criticism was a very important component of this call. Al-Albānī 
engaged in the practice of takhrīj and determining the authenticity of hadiths 
on an unprecedented scale in his time. His articles on weak and authentic 
hadiths were the foundation for his massive hadith encyclopaedia published 
later. It is not an exaggeration to say that his writings dominated the field of 
hadith criticism in the Islamic world for decades. These writings remained a 
point of reference for scholars and researchers in the Arabophone world for 
many years.
Generally speaking, al-Albānī’s method of hadith criticism was based on 
the method of ẓāhir al-isnād through an application of the principles detailed 
in the books of hadith terminology. The method of ẓāhir al-isnād depends 
mainly on the traits of the narrators to judge the authenticity of the hadiths, 
and takes the rules provided in the books of hadith terminology to be a 
consistent standard for evaluating hadiths even if doing so would involve 
contravening the actual rulings of earlier critics such as al-Bukhārī and his 
contemporaries. Hence, in situations where the two contradict each other, 
the principles of the books of hadith terminology are given precedence over 
the views of earlier hadith critics. His reliance on the ẓāhir al-isnād method 
may be observed through the following practices. First, al-Albānī adopted 
a near uniform application of the rules of the books of hadith terminology 
while neglecting additional evidence (qarāʾin), and refuting earlier scholars 
who used them. I argue here that this approach adopted by al-Albānī is quite 
unfeasible because the literal application of a given rule to a given hadith 
does not usually render consistent results. There are many examples of this 
phenomenon in his books. In a number of them, al-Albānī, according to the 
method of the school of ẓāhir al-isnād, focuses purely on a narrator’s status 
as a narrator and uses that status to affirm the soundness of narrations that 
earlier scholars had considered to be unsound,34 while rejecting the qarāʾin 
that earlier scholars considered in judging the authenticity of the hadith in 
question. Al-Albānī’s position is that such factors are a type of speculation 
that should not be given priority over established rules.35 This seems to stem 
from an assumption that such rules were applied uniformly throughout 
history.
It is useful to mention here an important point regarding the concept 
of ziyādat al-thiqah (additions by reliable transmitters) and its role in the 
disagreement between the two schools of hadith criticism discussed in this 
chapter. Al-Albānī accepts ziyādat al-thiqah and is inclined not to consider 
that a trustworthy narrator is mistaken. There is ample evidence for this 
inclination in his works and I provide here a handful of examples. Al-Albānī 
often asserts, ‘Ziyādat al-thiqah is acceptable.’ He considers it a strong and 
steady principle and rejects, by means of this rule, any criticism of a hadith 
report by earlier critics. He also argues for ziyādat al-thiqah on the basis of the 
principle, ‘He who memorised is a proof against him who did not.’36 He often 
says, when he prefers to consider a hadith marfūʿ (‘lifted’; that is, attributed 
to the Prophet) rather than mawquf (‘stopped’; that is, the narration goes 

  
Criticism in the Levant in the Twentieth Century  
[ 157
back only to the Companions), ‘This narrator is trustworthy and his marfūʿ 
hadith must be accepted’, sometimes adding, ‘as established in [the science 
of hadith] terminology’.37
Al-Albānī is generally reluctant to consider a trusted narrator to be mis-
taken. This is particularly true when it comes to additions (ziyādah), and his 
statements in this regard are numerous. For example, he says, ‘Otherwise, a 
trusted narrator would be called deluded without evidence; rather, simply 
based on [a critic’s] individual sense [or feeling]. Such methods have nothing 
to do with this science.’38 Another is his saying, ‘So-and-so is trustworthy 
and may not be considered deluded simply because someone disagrees with 
him. It is an acceptable addition (ziyādah).’39
Al-Albānī often criticises early scholars due to their rejection of ziyādat 
al-thiqah. He objects to Abū Dāwūd (d. 275/889), for example, in some of his 
rejections of ziyādat al-thiqah. He points out that, ‘As far as we are concerned, 
this iʿlāl (finding defects) means little because what we have is an addition by 
a trustworthy narrator and, [so], it is acceptable.’40 Al-Albānī also objects to 
the opinion of al-Bayhaqī (d. 458/1066) about the same issue, saying, ‘ʿAbd 
al-ʿAzīz is trustworthy and it is not permissible to consider him deluded 
just because Ayyūb disagrees with him.’41 He also refutes al-Dāraquṭnī’s 
(d. 385/995) discrediting of an addition in a report, saying, ‘The truth is that 
this isnād is sound because Abū Kāmil is a trustworthy, accurate memoriser, 
and Muslim referred to him, so his addition is acceptable.’42 Nevertheless, 
al-Albānī criticises Muslim (d. 261/875) and al-Dāraquṭnī’s description of a 
hadith as being weak by saying:
Muslim said that it had the defect of irsāl and al-Dāraquṭnī agreed with him 
saying, ‘the known narration from Layth is mursal’, as al-Khaṭīb narrates. 
However, the agreement of Qabīṣah and Ruwaym that it is mawṣūl through 
Layth does not leave me comfortable with [Muslim and al-Dāraquṭnī’s] iʿlāl 
as they both (Qabīṣah and Ruwaym) are trustworthy and the addition of a 
 trustworthy narrator is acceptable.43
The situation is the same when both al-Bukhārī (d. 256/870) and al-Tirmidhī 
(d. 279/892) judge a particular chain of transmission to be flawed as mursal. 
Here, al-Albānī says:
The first mawṣūl hadith report is narrated by trustworthy narrators who even 
appear in the narrations of Muslim, although al-Tirmidhī and al-Bukhārī con-
sider it mursal. If it were not for Abū Muʿāwiyah Muḥammad ibn Khāzim, who 
is known for some weakness in his memory, I would have said, ‘He added a 
fully connected isnād and such an addition is acceptable from a trustworthy 
narrator.’44
This is generally al-Albānī’s approach to criticism, of which there are myriad 
examples.

 158 ] 
Ahmad Snober
In a few cases, al-Albānī does not adhere to this rule and prefers the nar-
rations of certain trusted narrators over others.45 Still, this does not detract 
from the main contention that al-Albānī adheres to the school of ẓāhir al-isnād 
for several reasons. These examples are few in comparison with the numer-
ous texts in which he expresses his position that ziyādat al-thiqah, as a rule, is 
reliable. When he dismisses this rule, he often points to the memory of some 
narrator who is known to err in his transmission. So this does not affect the 
consistency of his application of the principle of ziyādat al-thiqah, but rather 
is about criticising the accuracy of the narrator. As we have seen, if the nar-
rator is reliable and accurate in the view of al-Albānī, or, in effect, the view 
of biographical works, this narrator’s addition is acceptable, even if uncor-
roborated by other narrations.46
Al-Albānī also rarely examines qarāʾin. He clearly states that his prac-
tice is to refer to the principles of hadith criticism (qawāʿid) as set out by 
textbooks of hadith terminology (muṣṭalaḥ).47 Even in circumstances where 
al-Albānī examines qarāʾin, he is clear that the final decision must be 
based on qawāʿid.48 It is possible that the intellectual developments and re- 
examinations that took place in the Levant in the last few decades, and the 
prolonged debates surrounding the concept of ʿilal in hadith had influenced 
some of the later opinions of al-Albānī. It may be said that posthumous 
modifications were made to the later books of al-Albānī and therefore his 
method of criticism appeared to differ later on, as these examples were all 
in his late years. Volumes 9–15 of Silsilat al-aḥādīth al-ḍaʿīfah (‘Compendium 
of Weak Hadiths’) were all published after his death and the editor explains 
in the preface that it was not reviewed or edited by al-Albānī. Additionally, 
the editor makes clear that he occasionally modified some judgements of the 
hadiths based on his understanding of al-Albānī’s method of hadith criti-
cism.49 These are all indications that there were posthumous modifications to 
al-Albānī’s late works, and the extent of these modifications needs to be veri-
fied. It appears that al-Albānī’s method does not depart from ẓāhir al-isnād 
tradition in hadith criticism.
The school of ẓāhir al-isnād is characterised by judging narrations based on 
the merits of the narrators. If the transmitter is trustworthy (thiqah) then the 
hadith is authentic (ṣaḥīḥ), if truthful (ṣadūq) then the hadith is good (ḥasan), 
and if weak then the hadith is weak (ḍaʿīf). This is most evident when a 
ṣadūq narrates a hadith that is narrated solely through him or her. The school 
of ẓāhir al-isnād usually acknowledges such a hadith as being ḥasan on the 
basis that the narrator is ṣadūq. However, this type of hadith would usually 
have been criticised by earlier scholars. This is evident in al-Albānī’s work 
in many instances, both theoretical and practical. Theoretically, al-Albānī 
quotes and agrees with Aḥmad Shākir’s position that the ruling (ḥukm) of a 
hadith is based on the ḥukm (classification) of its narrators. More specifically, 
after presenting the traditional twelve degrees of narrators mentioned by Ibn 
Ḥajar (d. 852/1449) in the introduction of Taqrīb al-Tahdhīb, Aḥmad Shākir 
says:

  
Criticism in the Levant in the Twentieth Century  
[ 159
He who belongs to the second or third degree, his hadith is considered ṣaḥīḥ par 
excellence . . . and he who belongs to the fourth rank (including ṣadūq and lā baʾsa 
bihi), his hadith is ṣaḥīḥ but of a lesser degree. This is the [level] considered ḥasan 
by al-Tirmidhī and left out by Abū Dāwūd …50
Al-Albānī also quotes al-Dhahabī (d. 748/1348) and Ibn Ḥajar on the degrees 
of narrators and comments: ‘If the narrator belongs to the fourth degree, 
then his hadith is ḥasan, that being what Aḥmad Shākir states in al-Bāʿith 
al-ḥathīth.’51 Al-Albānī considers many hadiths to be ḥasan according to this 
rule, and sometimes extends it to narrators of the fifth degree. Often, in con-
sulting Taqrīb al-Tahdhīb of Ibn Ḥajar, if he finds that the author has described 
the narrator as being ‘ṣadūq, or ṣadūq who has errors’, he considers his or 
her hadith ḥasan52 and, by doing so, al-Albānī slightly differs from Aḥmad 
Shākir’s approach in that the former is slightly more lenient.53
Additionally, al-Albānī often objects to some of the earlier scholars’ 
appraisals of hadiths of this type as weak, arguing that these appraisals 
contradict the rules.54 Al-Albānī’s strict and literal adherence to the rules of 
ẓāhir al-isnād based on terminological textbooks is evident in his acceptance 
of several hadiths as ḥasan that other critics rejected because they were nar-
rated by an individual ṣadūq who errs, whose uncorroborated reports are not 
considered acceptable.55 The upshot is that al-Albānī adheres strictly to the 
approach of criticism by ẓāhir al-isnād. Even amongst Salafīs, there are those 
who recognise al-Albānī’s approach and those who disagree with him such 
as Muqbil ibn Hādī al-Wādiʿī (d. 2001) of Yemen and Muṣṭafá al-ʿAdawī 
(1954–) of Egypt.56
Al-Albānī’s adherence to this approach can be attributed to several 
factors. As hadith criticism declined in the Levant and elsewhere in the 
nineteenth century, it was reasonable that re-engagement with hadith criti-
cism would reach to the closest period of intellectual production, that of Ibn 
Ḥajar, a period that focused on terminology and transmitter criticism. Ibn 
Ḥajar authored significant textbooks such as Nukhbat al-fikar on hadith ter-
minology, al-Taqrīb in multiple versions on reliable transmitters, and Lisān 
al-Mīzān on aspersed transmitters. The field today recognises that Ibn Ḥajar’s 
works represent the summation and epitome of hadith science, indispens-
able to hadith specialists. Scholars of hadith in the period of Ibn Ḥajar and 
before him would often note the difference between technical hadith criti-
cism and takhrīj, and would not usually reject appraisals by earlier scholars 
based on the books of terminology. There was a general acknowledgement 
that books of criticism were written as textbooks to train beginners and to 
document the judgements of earlier scholars, not as practical manuals in 
judging hadiths. A comparison between Ibn Ḥajar’s al-Nukat ʿalá Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ 
and his Nuzhat al-fikar, not to mention his hadith criticism, would show clear 
manifestations of this distinction. This may in fact relate to the ordinary 
practice of hadith criticism in those times when a student was taught and 
trained directly by his teacher and was given the opportunity to excel under 

 160 ] 
Ahmad Snober
his teacher’s guidance. Ibn Ḥajar learned this craft from his teachers, notably 
al-ʿIrāqī (d. 806/1404), whom he accompanied for many years.57 This process 
of hadith criticism as realised within a living tradition may have gone a long 
way towards limiting the excessive application of theoretical terminology 
to isnāds, unlike the method of al-Albānī, who significantly relied on these 
textbooks without formal training by way of a teacher–student relationship. 
Also, al-Albānī was influenced in this area by the works of Aḥmad Shākir, 
who himself adhered to the method of ẓāhir al-isnād in his criticism and may 
have been al-Albānī’s only predecessor in that era. Al-Albānī once lamented 
that they had only met once.58 This approach resulted in al-Albānī’s overall 
production of a sheer volume of works in the area of hadith criticism and 
takhrīj that would have been impossible had he used the method of early 
scholars, examining each hadith in its own context and relying on the 
method of subtle defects.
Hadith Criticism in the Traditionalist School (Abū Ghuddah and ʿItr)
When al-Albānī began his career in the middle of the twentieth century, there 
was little activity in the field of hadith criticism in the Levant and therefore 
al-Albānī received almost no serious challenge as scholars tended to warn 
against his method by criticising him personally as untrained by traditional 
scholars. Instead of addressing his method of hadith criticism, scholars 
tended to critique his ideas from the vantage point of traditional legal 
schools (madhhabs) and focused on how al-Albānī did not represent that tra-
dition. It was not until the arrival of ʿAbd Allāh al-Ḥabashī (1910–2008) in the 
Levant, who then wrote al-Taʿaqqub al-ḥathīth, to which al-Albānī responded 
in two separate articles, that debates became hadith-focused and not based 
on adherence to traditional legal schools.59 This trend continued with the 
writings of Nūr al-Dīn ʿItr in the early 1970s.60 Abū Ghuddah, however, did 
not discuss al-Albānī except in his work Kalimāt fī kashf abāṭīl wa-iftirāʾāt, and, 
even then, the majority of the book was more personal than academic in that 
it was a personal defence in the face of criticisms from al-Albānī. It is also 
notable that Abū Ghuddah dedicates the majority of the book to defending 
the reputation of Abū Ḥanīfah (d. 150/767) in hadith scholarship. I have only 
noted two occasions in which Abū Ghuddah addresses al-Albānī directly in 
matters of hadith scholarship.61
In the 1990s, Ḥasan al-Saqqāf (1961–) attempted to engage al-Albānī’s work 
through a number of writings, notable amongst them Tanāquḍāt al-Albānī 
al-wāḍiḥāt (‘Obvious Inconsistencies of al-Albānī’). However, al-Saqqāf’s 
concerted efforts against al-Albānī were quite unsuccessful as his responses 
to al-Albānī did not, in fact, result from or represent a methodological dif-
ference in the study of hadith. Rather, their foundation was that of doctrinal 
and ideological differences between the Traditionalist Sunni school with the 
contemporary Salafi school. This divide, sometimes described as a madhhabī 
(legal school) vs non-madhhabī or a Sufi vs non-Sufi debate, formed the core 

  
Criticism in the Levant in the Twentieth Century  
[ 161
of al-Saqqāf’s critiques of al-Albānī. In reality, both camps adhered, in theory 
and practice, to the method of ẓāhir al-isnād and hadith terminology.
This is also the case with Nūr al-Dīn ʿItr, who applies almost the exact 
method of al-Albānī and tends to apply the latter’s stance on ziyādat al-thiqah 
(addition in content by reliable transmitters). To demonstrate the differ-
ence between the methodologies of criticism based on ẓāhir al-isnād and on 
circumstantial evidence, let us look at a hadith on wiping the socks during 
ablution (al-masḥ ʿalá al-jawrab). Early hadith scholars tended to find fault 
with the narration that uses the word jawrabayn (‘socks’) as the narrator of 
that wording differed from the large number of narrators who narrated 
the hadith with the word khuffayn (leather socks) instead. While seemingly 
mundane in its topic, the hadith became a topic of discussion for early schol-
ars.62 ʿItr considered the hadith with the ‘jawrabayn’ wording acceptable and 
rejected the circumstantial evidence which early scholars used to question its 
validity. In this focus on the outlook of the isnād and rejection of circumstan-
tial evidence, ʿItr’s method does not differ much from al-Albānī’s, though 
their doctrinal differences remain stark.63
Similarly, ʿItr rejects circumstantial evidence when discussing the hadith 
report of Ghaylān’s conversion to Islam, which is narrated by one transmitter 
as mursal (loose) on one occasion and as muttaṣil (uninterrupted) on another 
occasion. This was enough reason for early scholars like Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal 
(d. 241/855), al-Bukhārī, Muslim and Abū Zurʿah al-Rāzī (d. 264/878) to 
dismiss the hadith as flawed. For ʿItr, the addition of the muttaṣil narration is 
acceptable because it is an addition by a reliable transmitter.64 Early  scholars 
pointed out that Maʿmar, while in Yemen, narrated the hadith as mursal 
whereas his narration in Basra, where his notes were not with him, was 
muttaṣil.65
As for Abū Ghuddah, as mentioned earlier, there is little evidence that he 
was seriously engaged in evaluating hadiths. When he occasionally examines 
reports, he shows a strong commitment to the method of ẓāhir al-isnād and 
a rejection of the use of circumstantial evidence that was so crucial to early 
scholars, such as in his study of the hadith of Ibn ʿUmar on raising hands in 
prayer: ‘He used to raise his hands only at the beginning of prayer and does 
not repeat [it].’66 Abū Ghuddah accepts this addition ‘and does not repeat [it]’ 
as valid though he agrees that early scholars discredited it because the major-
ity of transmitters did not include this addition in their narrations. This com-
plete reliance on ẓāhir al-isnād also indicates a dogmatic commitment since the 
addition supports the Ḥanafī school, which Abū Ghuddah followed.
The Traditionalist school’s adherence to a terminology- and rule-based 
method in evaluating hadith is also apparent in its stance on the issue of 
ruling on a hadith based on the rankings provided in biographical dictionar-
ies, which is focused on transmitter criticism (al-jarḥ wa-al-taʿdīl). Here, too, 
the practice of the Traditionalists is in agreement with that of al-Albānī. In 
this regard, Abū Ghuddah’s comments on al-Dhahabī’s rankings for nar-
rators in his Qawāʿid ʿulūm al-ḥadīth (‘The Rules of the Sciences of Hadith’) 

 162 ] 
Ahmad Snober
are quite informative of his strict adherence to the classical school of ẓāhir 
al-isnād. Here he states:
[Al-Dhahabī] ranked someone ṣadūq (truthful) at a lesser level than a thiqah 
(trustworthy) and higher than those who were described as maḥalluhu al-ṣidq 
(his place is truthfulness), jayyid al-ḥadīth (his hadith is somewhat good), ṣāliḥ 
al-ḥadīth (his hadith is all right), ḥasan al-ḥadīth (his hadith is fair) . . . Hadith 
scholars have ruled that the hadiths of narrators who are described with these 
terms are considered to be ḥasan. This practice is evident and widespread in 
books such as Naṣb al-rāyah, Fatḥ al-bārī, Nayl al-awṭār and others dealing with 
takhrīj and the classification of reports.67
Thereafter, he quotes Ibn Ḥajar’s twelve ranks of hadith narrators. Ibn Ḥajar 
states, ‘The fourth rank is he who is slightly below the third rank, and usually 
referred to as ṣadūq or lā baʾsa bihi (there is no issue with him).’ Commenting 
on this, Abū Ghuddah says:
By stating that the fourth rank is little below the third, al-Ḥāfiẓ Ibn Ḥajar points 
out that terms of this rank are indications of reliability but to a lesser level than 
the third rank. He also points out that narrations of fourth-rank narrators would 
be independently acceptable (ḥasan li-dhātih) and this goes back to their (classical 
hadith scholars’) definition of ḥasan hadiths.
Further to the point, Abū Ghuddah then quotes Aḥmad Shākir as saying, 
‘The hadith of a fourth-rank narrator is authentic of the second degree, that 
which is called ḥasan by al-Tirmidhī.’ Here, Abū Ghuddah indicates his 
approval of Shākir’s analysis, saying, ‘It is a very good clarification.’68
This agreement in theory and practice between the Traditionalist and 
contemporary Salafi schools most likely returns to the following. First, the 
circumstances and motives that prevented Salafi hadith critics from going 
further than Ibn Ḥajar in their historical reference and inspiration for hadith 
criticism are more acute amongst the Traditionalists. This is in large part due 
to Traditionalists’ attempt to adhere, quite strictly, to ‘tradition’ in the sense 
of a scholarly inheritance, so that they usually tend not to bypass the author-
ity of the major hadith commentaries, let alone authorities of the magnitude 
of Ibn Ḥajar. Hence, if a Salafi tradition that encourages reference to the early 
period of Islam as much as possible was unable to deal in frameworks from a 
period earlier than Ibn Ḥajar, the Traditionalists would be all the more hard-
pressed to do so. Secondly, the Traditionalist school was not preoccupied 
with hadith criticism in general. In many ways, their entry into the field in 
the twentieth century was an act of defence rather than a serious engagement 
with the theories and practices of the field. Thirdly, the method of learn-
ing and teaching in the Traditionalist school does not encourage criticism 
in general and especially in the Levant, where scholars and their students 
seldom deviate from conventional modes of thinking.

  
Criticism in the Levant in the Twentieth Century  
[ 163
The School of Circumstantial Evidence (qarāʾin) in the Levant
The school of qarāʾin may be defined as a school that does not consider 
hadith terminology to be applicable in judging hadith all or most of the time. 
Instead, what matters is the ‘evidence’ (qarāʾin) related to each individual 
hadith. It is from this perspective that the proponents of this method com-
monly say, ‘To each hadith belongs its own form of critique.’69 It also takes 
as a principle that the narrator is judged by what he or she narrates, not the 
opposite. Ḥamzah al-Mallībārī, a pioneer of this school, says of the relation-
ship between the narrator and his or her narrations, ‘Determining the narra-
tor’s characteristics and the level of his accuracy depends on the evaluation 
of his narrations; the former depends on the latter. Therefore, early scholars 
did not consider a narrator’s rank the primary point of departure for judging 
a hadith.’70 It is inaccurate to say that ‘all the hadiths of a ṣadūq are ḥasan’, 
for example, because he was lowered to that rank because of faults that 
appeared in his narrations. Hence, it is not possible to conclude that all his 
narrations are sound. Early scholars would look into circumstantial evidence 
for the narrator and the narration before judging an individual hadith and 
would not usually give a general ruling of reliability.
Among the most famous figures of this school are Ḥamzah al-Mallībārī, 
Ḥātim al-ʿAwnī (1966–) and ʿAbd Allāh al-Saʿd (1962–). Most of these schol-
ars are ideologically aligned to the Salafi school, but disagree strongly with 
al-Albānī’s method of hadith criticism. This substantiates the main argu-
ment of this chapter that the classification of hadith trends in the twentieth 
century according to ideological and doctrinal alliances does not reflect the 
reality of these movements. Amongst these scholars, the most influential in 
the Levant has been al-Mallībārī, who moved to Jordan in 1996 and taught 
at the University of Jordan for four years. Still, in all likelihood, his success 
seems to have been secured through the groundwork previously provided 
by Hammām Saʿīd, who paved the way for this school in the Jordanian 
hadith movement. These contributions can be seen in his important study 
on Ibn Rajab al-Ḥanbalī’s Sharḥ ʿIlal al-Tirmidhī. Saʿīd’s critical edition of the 
book begins with a substantial analysis of the subject, which may be seen as a 
ground-breaking work at a time when very few were even engaging with the 
topic. Also, Saʿīd taught for years at the University of Jordan and introduced 
many of his post-graduate students to the field of ʿilal. To name a few of his 
prominent students who have since had a significant impact on the field, 
ʿAbd al-Karīm al-Wuraykāt (1964–), Asʿad Tayyim and Sulṭān al-ʿAkāylah 
(1953–) are all currently university professors and follow the approach of 
ʿilal al-ḥadīth. It can be argued that Saʿīd’s work created fertile ground for the 
emergence of the school of circumstantial evidence in Jordan and thus paved 
the way for the spread of al-Mallībārī’s ideas when he arrived in Jordan in 
1996 and began teaching at the University of Jordan.
The writings of al-Mallībārī and his teaching methodology represented a 
strong criticism of the school of ẓāhir al-isnād. The most important of his books 

 164 ] 
Ahmad Snober
that spread in that era in Jordan were al-Muwāzanah bayna al-mutaqaddimīn 
wa-al-mutaʾakhkhirīn (‘A Comparison between Scholars of the Early and 
Late Periods [in Methods of Hadith Criticism]’) and Naẓarāt jadīdah fī ʿulūm 
al-ḥadīth (‘New Perspectives on Hadith Sciences’).71 These two books were 
well received in the Levant and generated significant discussions, to the 
extent that al-Albānī spoke out against al-Mallībārī in a recorded lecture 
titled Bidaʿ al-muḥdithīn ʿalá al-muḥaddithīn (‘Innovations of Pseudo-Scholars 
of Hadith’). Al-Mallībārī himself did not shy away from criticising al-Albānī 
or others. Without explicitly mentioning him by name, al-Mallībārī fre-
quently referred to al-Albānī’s methods and offered an equally detailed cri-
tique in his al-Muwāzanah and Naẓarāt. In the second edition of al-Muwāzanah, 
he discusses Abū Ghuddah on the above-mentioned hadith on raising hands 
in prayer.
This movement, which began with Saʿīd Hammām and Ḥamzah 
al-Mallībārī, is increasingly replacing the school of ẓāhir al-isnād, previously 
dominant in the Levant and throughout the Middle East. Nowadays, the 
predominant tendency among university professors in the Levant is to use 
the method of criticism based on the ʿilal approach, which is becoming the 
main component of the hadith curriculum. There is also abundant research 
dedicated to the study of scholars and their methods of hadith criticism. For 
example, we note such methods in the works of al-Mallībārī’s prominent stu-
dents such as ʿAbd al-Salām Abū Samḥah (1974–), who wrote a commend-
able analysis of munkar (objectionable) hadith reports, and Aḥmad ʿAbd 
Allāh, whose analysis of al-Bukhārī’s hadith criticism in his al-Tārīkh al-kabīr 
was met with significant criticism from Nūr al-Dīn ʿItr, who dismisses the 
approach of ʿilal altogether.
In the Levant, we note the increasing weakness of the ẓāhir al-isnād school’s 
control over the academic landscape with an equal increase of influence from 
the school of qarāʾin. This observation can be marked by the frequent rebut-
tals published by proponents of the ẓāhir al-isnād method, which in many 
ways indicate a sense of being under siege. We also note this predominance 
in the work of scholarly societies such as the ‘Association of Hadith’ in recent 
years. As of late, many of their academic conferences and seminars have 
focused on the differences between the two schools and the intellectual basis 
for both. This need to regularly compare the progress of both schools is a 
strong indication of the increased significance of the school of qarāʾin.
In summing up the major points of this essay we note the following. The 
science of hadith criticism in the Levant remained almost stagnant from 
the middle of the ninth/fifteenth century until the beginning of the Arab 
Renaissance in the late Ottoman era, at which time two scholars, Ṭāhir 
al-Jazāʾirī and Jamāl al-Dīn al-Qāsimī, began to focus their attention on the 
study of hadith. While both had little to offer by way of technical criticism, it 
was al-Albānī who revived hadith criticism in the Levant. A number of per-
sonal, social, political and intellectual factors contributed to al-Albānī’s rise 
as a hadith critic and the widespread adoption of his ideas. His method of 

  
Criticism in the Levant in the Twentieth Century  
[ 165
hadith criticism was, with rare exceptions, a strict application of the method 
of ẓāhir al-isnād in accordance with the terminology detailed in the classical 
textbooks of hadith terminology. Those who opposed al-Albānī from the 
Traditionalist school such ʿAbd al-Fattāḥ Abū Ghuddah and Nūr al-Dīn 
ʿItr also significantly relied in their hadith criticism on the method of ẓāhir 
al-isnād. The Jordanian hadith movement started by Hammām Saʿīd marked 
the beginnings of a form of hadith criticism different from that of ẓāhir 
al-isnād. This movement was further developed by Ḥamzah al-Mallībārī, 
whose work during the late 1990s provided a formal framework for the 
school of qarāʾin, allowing it to enjoy a wider area of approval amongst 
researchers.
The emergence of the qarāʾin school in recent decades is a natural and 
logical progress from the ẓāhir al-isnād school. The intellectual environment 
that prevailed during and immediately after the Ottoman era essentially 
neglected hadith criticism in its entirety. Hence, a leap from a state of no 
hadith criticism to one in which the familiar, if unused, terminology-based 
approach was not considered to be the final standard would have been too 
much to ask for. Rather, what was needed was a slow and somewhat natural 
progression. In reality, several historical events and intellectual trends were 
necessary for the school of qarāʾin to be able to form and mature. The rise of 
Salafism, the increased interest in hadith in general, and significant finan-
cial support for hadith projects all factored into creating an environment in 
which scholars were able to revisit hadith texts and historical criticism in a 
nuanced manner, eventually leading to an internal, method-based critique. 
Additionally, as researchers needed an academic setting in which they could 
challenge and explore previously held convictions without fear of backlash 
from the intellectual élite, Jordan, with its lack of traditional institutions of 
learning and plethora of opinions, was an ideal location. Indeed, it is difficult 
to think of a similar movement flourishing in neighbouring Syria as it would 
have quickly run up against strong opposition from its classical institutions 
and scholars.
To most appropriately classify hadith trends in the Levant and elsewhere, 
one must examine the forms of hadith criticism that manifest themselves 
in the region. It is inaccurate to speak of ideological or doctrinal schools of 
thought as the basis for assessing the trends of hadith criticism. As we have 
seen, one ideological school may exhibit various approaches to hadith criti-
cism. Doctrinal differences do not necessarily relate to the theoretical or actu-
alised practice of hadith criticism. Indeed, the common dependence on the 
method of ẓāhir al-isnād by Salafis and Traditionalists in the 1980s is a strong 
indication that even groups who are, in some ways, diametrically opposed in 
their creedal ideologies may not carry those differences over to their analysis 
of hadith.

 166 ] 
Ahmad Snober
Notes
 * I would like to thank Omar Matadar, the director of Qasid Institute in Jordan, for 
his assistance in translating this chapter and Belal Abu-Alabbas for his valuable 
comments.
 1. An example of this classification is Maḥmūd Saʿīd Mamdūḥ, al-Ittijāhāt 
al-ḥadīthīyah fī al-qarn al-rābiʿ ʿashar al-hijrī, 3rd edn (Cairo: Dār al-Baṣāʾir, 2009), 
43–7. This chapter focuses on al-Albānī, Abū Ghuddah and ʿItr for the purpose 
of brevity and exploring the primary contenders. A study of scholars such as 
Shuʿayb al-Arnaʾūṭ and Muḥammad ʿAwwāmah would corroborate the findings 
of the present one.
 2. Muḥammad ʿAzzūz, Madrasat al-ḥadīth fī bilād al-Shām khilāl al-qarn al-thāmin 
al-hijrī (Beirut: Dār al-Bashāʾir al-Islāmīyah, 2000).
 3. Ibn Ḥajar says of Ibn Nāṣir al-Dīn, ‘When the region lacked hadith scholars, he 
became the hadith scholar of the region.’ Al-Sakhāwī then comments about Ibn 
Nāṣir al-Dīn that ‘No one [of his excellence] succeeded him in the Levant. The 
gate was sealed there.’ See al-Sakhāwī, al-Ḍawʾ al-lāmiʿ li-ahl al-qarn al-tāsiʿ, 12 
vols (Cairo: Maktabat al-Quds, 1353–6, repr. Beirut: Dār Maktabat al-Ḥayāh, 
n.d.), 8:105–6. For a short biography of Sibṭ ibn al-ʿAjamī and an overview 
of his scholarly work, see Muḥammad ʿAwwāmah’s study of al-Dhahabī’s 
al-Kāshif, al-Kāshif fī maʿrifat man lahu riwāyah fī al-kutub al-sittah, ed. Muḥammad 
ʿAwwāmah and Aḥmad Muḥammad Namir al-Khaṭīb, 2 vols (Jeddah: Dār 
al-Qiblah lil-Thaqāfah al-Islāmīyah and Muʾassasat ʿUlūm al-Qurʾān, 1992), 
1:212–80.
 4. See Ibn Ṭūlūn, Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad, al-Fulk al-mashḥūn fī aḥwāl Muḥammad 
ibn Ṭūlūn, ed. Muḥammad Khayr Ramaḍān Yūsuf (Beirut: Dār Ibn Ḥazm, 1996), 
35. Ibn Ṭūlūn states in his biography of Ibn Zurayq that none of his own teach-
ers rivalled Ibn Zurayq in the sciences of hadith. However, al-Sakhāwī in his 
al-Ḍawʾ al-lāmiʿ and Ibn al-ʿImād in his Shadharāt al-dhahab note that Ibn Zurayq 
was not a leading scholar of hadith. See al-Sakhāwī, Ḍawʾ 7:169–70, and Ibn 
al-ʿImād, Shadharāt al-dhahab fi akhbār man dhahab, ed. Maḥmūd al-Arnaʾūt, 11 
vols (Damascus: Dār Ibn Kathīr, 1986–95), 9:551.
 5. Ibn Ṭūlūn was also a student of Yūsuf ibn ʿAbd al-Hādī, also known as Ibn al-
Mibrad (d. 909/1503), but he does not note him as a leading scholar of hadith.
 6. ʿAbd al-Razzāq al-Bīṭār mentions nineteen scholars who taught hadith science 
under the dome of al-Nisr, which was dedicated to Levantine scholars of the 
highest calibre in the Ottoman era, between 1050/1640 and the demise of the 
Ottoman Empire. See ʿAbd al-Razzāq al-Bīṭār, Natījat al-fikr fī man darasa taḥta 
qubbat al-nisr, ed. M. N. al-ʿAjamī (Beirut: Dār al-Bashāʾir al-Islāmīyah, 1998), 
96. However, there is little hadith criticism in the works of these scholars, 
except for Ismāʿīl al-ʿAjlūnī (d. 1162/1748), the author of Kashf al-khafāʾ, a work 
dedicated to identifying weak hadiths that are well circulated among the masses, 
though the work itself shows little input from al-ʿAjlūnī himself. The teach-
ers of al-ʿAjlūnī themselves do not exhibit significant hadith scholarship. One 
may say the same of the teachers of Aḥmad ibn Aḥmad ibn al-ʿAjmī al-Ḥalabī 

  
Criticism in the Levant in the Twentieth Century  
[ 167
(1086/1675), who composed an annotation to al-Suyūṭī’s Tadrīb al-rāwī. See also 
ʿUmar al-Nashūqātī’s Juhūd ʿulamāʾ Dimashq fi riwāyat al-ḥadīth al-sharīf fi al-ʿaṣr 
al-ʿuthmānī (Damascus: Dār al-Nawādir, 2012). Al-Nashūqātī notes that these 
efforts tended to focus on hadith narration rather than criticism, explaining the 
scarcity of works by Damascene scholars. Also, works related to hadith criticism 
included little input from these scholars, showing a lack of independent thought 
(see al-Nashūqātī, Juhūd, 16, 46).
 7. Muḥammad Muṭīʿ al-Ḥāfiẓ, Dār al-ḥadīth al-ashrafīyah bi-Dimashq (Damascus: Dār 
al-Fikr, 2001) 17–18, 23; al-Nashūqātī, Juhūd, 157.
 8. ʿAbd al-Razzāq al-Bīṭār, Ḥilyat al-bashar fī tārīkh al-qarn al-thālith ʿashar, ed. 
Muḥammad Bahjah al-Bīṭār, 3 vols, 2nd edn (Beirut: Dār Ṣādir, 1993), 1:377. 
Al-Bīṭār observes that reading hadith merely for gaining blessings prevailed 
among students of hadith during the Ottoman era. See also al-Nashūqātī, Juhūd, 
272–3.
 9. Al-ʿAjlūnī, Kashf al-khafāʾ wa-muzīl al-ilbās ʿammā ishtahara min al-aḥādīth ʿalá 
alsinat al-nās, 2 vols (Cairo: Maktabat al-Qudsī, 1351–2), 1:10, 2:262. Several 
scholars of the Levant, in personal records of what they had narrated from their 
teachers, listed chains of transmission that included spiritual unveilings. See 
Muḥammad Amīn ibn ʿĀbdīn (d. 1252/1836), ʿUqūd al-laʾālī fī al-asānīd al-ʿawālī, 
ed. Muḥammad Ibrāhīm al-Ḥusayn (Beirut: Dār al-Bashāʾir al-Islāmīyah, 2010), 
315, and al-Nashūqātī, Juhūd, 531–3.
10. I do not present Badr al-Dīn al-Ḥasanī (1850–1935) here because he specialised in 
narration and not in hadith criticism, as observable from the records of his writ-
ings and teaching sessions.
11. See Rashīd Riḍā’s forward to Jamāl al-Dīn al-Qāsimī, Qawāʿid al-taḥdīth min 
funūn muṣṭalaḥ al-ḥadīth, ed. Muḥammad Bahjah al-Bīṭār, 4th edn (Beirut: Dār 
al-Nafāʾis, 2006), 23. Al-Jazāʾirī wrote ʿUqūd al-laʾālī fi al-asānīd al-ʿawālī, printed 
in 1885, and another book titled Mubtadaʾ al-khabar, on hadith terminology, 
which is probably an abridgment of his Tawjīh al-naẓar. See Abū Ghuddah’s 
introduction to Tawjīh al-naẓar ilá uṣūl al-athar, ed. Abū Ghuddah, 2 vols (Aleppo: 
Maktabat al-Maṭbūʿāt al-Islāmīyah, 1995), 1:26.
12. Muḥammad Anas Sarmīnī, al-Shaykh Muḥammad Jamāl al-Dīn al-Qāsimī wa-juhūduhu 
al-ḥadīthīyah: dirāsah taḥlīlīyah (Beirut: Dār al-Bashāʾir al-Islāmīyah, 2010), 513.
13. Albert Hourani, al-Fikr al-ʿarabī fi ʿaṣr al-nahḍah 1798–1939, trans. Karīm ʿAzqūl 
(Beirut: Dār al-Nahār, n.d.), 270–1, 311–12.
14. Al-Albānī thus describes the beginning of his confrontation with the predominant 
traditionalist religious environment: ‘Then, God enabled me, without guidance 
from anyone, to study the rules and practice of hadith and Sunnah, after I was 
taught the basics of Ḥanafī jurisprudence and the so-called ancillary subjects such 
as grammar and rhetoric by my father and other scholars after graduating from 
al-Isʿāf al-Khayrī Primary School. I then began to call on my brothers and compan-
ions to correct their creedal beliefs, to abandon the zealous following of traditional 
legal schools, to warn them of weak and fabricated hadiths, and to encourage them 
to revive the correct sunan that had been abandoned by even the scholars among 
them, such as the performance of Eid prayers in congregational areas, in Damascus. 

 168 ] 
Ahmad Snober
This Sunnah then spread to Aleppo and other parts of Syria and continued its 
spreading until it reached Amman (Jordan) by some of our brothers. I warned 
people against building mosques over graves, and I wrote my book, Taḥdhīr al-sājid 
min ittikhādh al-qubūr masājid (‘Warning the Prostrator against Taking Graveyards 
as Mosques’), at a time when some of my relatives used to go pray in the Umayyad 
mosque because it housed the tomb of Yaḥyá, as they claimed …’ See al-Albānī, 
Silsilat al-aḥādīth al-ṣaḥīḥah, 9 vols in 7 (Riyadh: Maktabat al-Maʿārif, 1995–2002), 
7:611, and Ibrāhīm al-ʿAlī, Muḥammad Nāṣir al-Dīn al-Albānī, muḥaddith al-ʿaṣr 
wa-nāṣir al-sunnah (Damascus: Dār al-Qalam, 2001), 22.
15. Muḥammad ibn Nāṣir al-ʿAjmī, Imām al-Shām fi ʿaṣrih Jamāl al-Qāsimī: sīratuhu 
al-dhātīyah (Beirut: Dār al-Bashāʾir al-Islāmīyah, 2009), 63–91.
16. Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm al-Shaybānī, Ḥayāt al-Albānī wa-āthāruh wa-thanāʾ 
al-ʿulamāʾ ʿalayh (Cairo: Maktabat al-Saddāwī, 1987), 45.
17. al-Shaybānī, Ḥayāt al-Albānī, 46.
18. Al-Albānī states, ‘This does not prevent me from admitting that some recent 
scholars have made a great mark on this field of knowledge, and that we benefit 
from their scholarship, such as Aḥmad Shākir and other prominent scholars’: al-
Silsilah al-ṣaḥīḥah 4:15.
19. Nūr al-Dīn Ṭālib, Maqālāt al-shaykh al-Albānī (Riyadh: Dār Aṭlas, 2001), 179.
20. Al-Albānī, ‘al-Albānī yarwī qiṣṣatahu maʿa al-ikhwān’, al-Mujtamaʿ, 10 March 
1981, (519), 29.
21. Ṭālib, Maqālāt al-shaykh, 164–72.
22. Al-Albānī, ‘al-Albānī yataḥaddathu ʿan Sayyid Qutb wa-majallat al-Mujtamaʿ’, 
al-Mujtamaʿ, 17 March 1981, (520), 24.
23. Al-Albānī, ‘al-Albānī yarwī’, 31. He attributes this split to organisational and 
factional issues in the Brotherhood.
24. Al-Albānī, ‘al-Albānī yarwī’, 29.
25. Al-Albānī, al-Silsilah al-ṣaḥīḥah, 7:611.
26. Al-ʿAlī, al-Albānī, 24.
27. Al-ʿAlī, al-Albānī, 24.
28. See the introduction to the second edition of al-Albānī’s Taḥdhīr al-sājid min 
ittikhādh al-qubūr masājid (Beirut: al-Maktab al-Islāmī, 1392).
29. ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Muḥammad al-ʿAyzarī, Juhūd al-shaykh al-Albānī fi al-ḥadīth 
(Riyadh: Maktabat al-Rushd, 2006), 50.
30. Al-ʿAyzarī, Juhūd al-shaykh al-Albānī, 56.
31. Al-ʿAyzarī, Juhūd al-shaykh al-Albānī, 50.
32. Ṭālib, Maqālāt al-shaykh, 18.
33. Muḥammad ibn Nāṣir al-ʿAjmī, al-Rasāʾil al-mutabādalah bayna Jamāl al-Dīn 
al-Qāsimī wa-Maḥmūd Shukrī al-Alūsī (Beirut: Dār al-Bashāʾir al-Islāmīyah, 2001), 
12–13; also see 140, 149, 156–7, 164, 173–4.
34. For a serious study of al-Albānī’s steadfast application of this ẓāhir al-isnād 
method, see Aḥmad Muḥammad al-Khalīl, Mustadrak al-taʿlīl ʿalá Irwāʾ al-ghalīl: 
dirāsah ḥadīthīyah tuʿnā bi-bayān al-aḥādīth allatī ṣuḥḥiḥat fī al-Irwāʾ wa-aʿallahā 
al-aʾimmah al-mutaqaddimūn, maʿa sharḥ tilka al-ʿilal (Dammam: Dār Ibn al-Jawzī, 
2008).

  
Criticism in the Levant in the Twentieth Century  
[ 169
35. Al-Albānī, Irwāʾ al-ghalīl fī takhrīj aḥādīth Manār al-sabīl, 9 vols (Beirut: al-
Maktab al-Islāmī, 1979–87), 3:31, 4:50; al-Albānī, al-Silsilah al-ṣaḥīḥah, 5:227; 
al-Albānī, Ṣaḥīḥ Sunan Abī Dāwūd, 3 vols (Riyadh: Maktabat al-Maʿārif, 1998), 
1:247.
36. Al-Albānī, Irwāʾ 4:157, 176, 5:326; al-Albānī, al-Silsilah al-ṣaḥīḥah, 5:153; al-Albānī, 
Silsilat al-aḥādīth al-ḍaʿīfah, 14 vols (Riyadh: Maktabat al-Maʿārif, 1412–25), 13:726.
37. See, for example, al-Albānī, Aṣl ṣifat ṣalāt al-Nabī, 3 vols (Riyadh: Maktabat 
al-Maʿārif, 2006), 1:409, 2:425,736, 3:969; al-Albānī, Irwāʾ 2:6, 338, 3:170; al-Albānī, 
al-Silsilah al-ṣaḥīḥah, 1:507, 812, 2:433, 681, 3:72, 180, 5:393, 610, 6:668, 8:1132; 
al-Albānī, al-Silsilah al-ḍaʿīfah 13:422; al-Albānī, Ṣaḥīḥ Abī Dāwūd 1:28, 109, 143, 
2:326, 348.
38. Al-Albānī, Ṣaḥīḥ Abī Dāwūd 1:274.
39. Al-Albānī, Irwāʾ 2:77.
40. Al-Albānī, Irwāʾ 2:51.
41. Al-Albānī, Irwāʾ 2:77.
42. Al-Albānī, al-Silsilah al-ṣaḥīḥah 1:85.
43. Al-Albānī, al-Silsilah al-ṣaḥīḥah 2:293.
44. Al-Albānī, al-Silsilah al-ṣaḥīḥah 2:229.
45. Al-Albānī, al-Silsilah al-ḍaʿīfah 10:758, 12:89.
46. Muḥammad Ḥamdī Abū ʿAbduh, Manhaj al-ʿallāmah al-muḥaddith al-Albānī fī 
taʿlīl al-ḥadīth (Beirut: Dār al-Luʾluʾah, 2013), 185–6.
47. This approach has generally been dismissed as an unreliable representation of 
how early critics worked. See, for example, Leonard T. Librande, ‘The Supposed 
Homogeneity of Technical Terms in Hadith Study’, Muslim World 72 (1982): 
34–50; Eerik Dickinson, The Development of Early Sunnite Ḥadīth Criticism: the 
Taqdimah of Ibn Abī Ḥātim al-Rāzī, Islamic History and Civilization, Studies and 
Texts, 38 (Leiden: Brill, 2001); and Belal Abu-Alabbas, ‘The Principles of Hadith 
Criticism in the Writings of al-Shāfiʿī and Muslim’, Islamic Law and Society 24 
(2017): 311–35.
48. Al-Albānī, al-Silsilah al-ḍaʿīfah 10:758.
49. Al-Albānī, al-Silsilah al-ḍaʿīfah 9:4. Note that this volume was printed in 2001 after 
al-Albānī’s demise.
50. Aḥmad Muḥammad Shākir, al-Bāʿith al-ḥathīth sharḥ Ikhtiṣār ʿulūm al-ḥadīth by 
Ibn Kathīr, comm’y by Nāṣir al-Dīn al-Albānī (Riyadh: Maktabat al-Maʿārif, 
1996), 98.
51. Al-Albānī, Ādāb al-zifāf fī al-sunnah (Amman: al-Maktabah al-Islāmīyah, 1409), 
227.
52. Al-Albānī, Irwāʾ 1:267, 3:408, 5:109, 332; al-Albānī, Tamām al-minnah fī al-taʿlīq 
ʿalá fiqh al-sunnah, 4th edn (Riyadh: Dār al-Rāyah, n.d.), 128; al-Albānī, al-Silsilah 
al-ṣaḥīḥah 1:516, 2:115.
53. Khālid Manṣūr al-Durays, al-Ḥadīth al-ḥasan li-dhātihi wa-li-ghayrihi, 5 vols 
(Riyadh: Dār Adwāʾ al-Salaf, 2005), 4:1856.
54. Al-Albānī, Irwāʾ 2:96; al-Albānī, Tamām al-minnah, 202.
55. Al-Durays, Ḥadīth 4:2014, 2017–19.
56. For more on this, see al-Khalīl, Mustadrak al-taʿlīl. He mentions about 149 hadith 

 170 ] 
Ahmad Snober
reports in which al-Albānī disagrees with early scholars. See also Aḥmad 
al-Jābirī, al-Dars al-ḥadīthī al-muʿāṣir (Beirut: Markaz Namāʾ, 2017), 72–7.
57. Ibn Ḥajar says about his teacher, al-ʿIrāqī, ‘We have not seen in this field anyone 
who was more knowledgeable than he was.’ See Ibn Ḥajar, Inbāʾ al-ghumr 
bi-abnāʾ al-ʿumr, Lajnat Iḥyā’ al-Turāth al-Islāmī ser. 6, 3 vols (Cairo: al-Majlis 
al-Aʿlā lil-Shuʾūn al-Islāmīyah, 1969–72), 2:276–7.
58. Al-Albānī, al-Silsilah al-ḍaʿīfah 11:283.
59. Ṭālib, Maqālāt al-shaykh, 68–9.
60. Nūr al-Dīn ʿItr, Mādhā ʿan al-marʾah, 13th edn (Damascus: Dār al-Yamāmah, 
2003), 232–47.
61. ʿAbd al-Fattāh Abū Ghuddah, Khuṭbat al-ḥājah laysat sunnah fī mustahall al-kutub 
wa-al-muʾallafāt (Beirut: Dār al-Bashāʾir al-Islāmīyah, 1999).
62. Al-Bayhaqī, al-Sunan al-kubrá, ed. Muḥammad ʿAbd al-Qādir ʿAṭā, 3rd edn, 11 
vols (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, 2003), 1:284.
63. Nūr al-Dīn ʿItr, Iʿlām al-anām sharḥ Bulūgh al-marām, 7th edn, 4 vols (Damascus: 
Dār al-Farfūr, 1998), 1:186–7, and compare al-Albānī’s Irwāʾ 1:137–8 and Māhir 
al-Faḥl, al-Jāmiʿ fī al-ʿilal wa-al-fawāʾid, 6 vols (Riyadh: Dār Ibn al-Jawzī, 2009), 
2:189–201.
64. ʿItr, Iʿlām al-anām 3:344 – here, ʿItr’s judgement coincides with al-Albānī’s in Irwāʾ 
al-ghalīl 6:292.
65. ʿItr, Iʿlām al-anām 3:344.
66. Muḥammad ʿAbd al-Rashīd al-Nuʿmānī, al-Imām Ibn Mājah wa-kitābuh al-Sunan, 
ed. ʿAbd al-Fattāh Abū Ghuddah (Beirut: Dār al-Bashāʾir al-Islāmīyah, 1996?), 
305.
67. See his edition of Ẓafar Aḥmad al-Tahānawī, Qawāʿid fī ʿulūm al-ḥadīth, ed. ʿAbd 
al-Fattāh Abū Ghuddah, 3rd edn (Beirut, Dār al-Qalam, 1972), 245.
68. Al-Tahānawī, Qawāʿid fī ʿulūm al-ḥadīth.
69. Ḥamzah al-Mallībārī, al-Muwāzanah bayna al-mutaqaddimīn wa-al-mutaʾakhkhirīn, 
2nd edn (Beirut: Dār Ibn Ḥazm, 2001), 12–16, 33–5.
70. Ḥamzah al-Mallībārī, Naẓarāt jadīdah fī ʿulūm al-ḥadīth (Beirut: Dār Ibn Ḥazm, 
2003), 86.
71. For more on the school of qarāʾin, see al-Mallībārī’s two works mentioned in nn. 
69 and 70.

 [ 171 ]
CHAPTER
8
The Reception and Representation 
of Western Hadith Studies in 
Turkish Academe
Fatma Kızıl
Introduction
The question of how Western hadith studies have been perceived in Turkey 
cannot be discussed without reference to the Turkish Republic’s broader 
efforts to rapidly Westernise virtually all spheres of Turkish culture. The 
newly-established state identified Western civilisation as the telos that guided 
and organised its multi-faceted reforms. The adoption of Westernisation1 
(Garblılaşma) as an explicit government policy, and especially the principles 
of laicism (1928–37) and language reform (1928), reshaped the very essence of 
the social fabric, with far-reaching effects on virtually all major institutions.2 
Higher religious education was no exception. The process of Westernisation 
began before the Republican era.
In many ways, the educational system could even be described as the 
primary conduit of Westernisation in the late Ottoman era. The moderate 
proposals for piecemeal adoption of Western technology and institutions 
advocated by the Ottomans gave way to more forceful demands for a com-
prehensive adoption of a secularising Western culture and worldview after 
the Second Constitutional Period (1908–18).3 Şükrü Hanioğlu underlines the 
influence of foreign ideas on so-called Garbcı (‘Westernising’) intellectuals 
of this period, noting that their ideology consisted of a ‘peculiar mixture of 
materialism, scientism, and Social Darwinism’.4 Nearly all of the propos-
als voiced by Garbcı intellectuals of the Second Constitutional Period, like 
Kılıçzâde Hakkı5 (d. 1960), were implemented in the Republican period. 
Policies such as the inclusion of women in the public sphere, the closure of 
Sufi lodges and madrasas, the abolition of sharīʿah courts, and the adoption 
of the Latin alphabet were all based on Kılıçzâde’s proposals.6
It was also during the Second Constitutional Period that new educational 
institutions facilitated the spread of Western thought and culture among 
the Ottoman intellectual class. Halil İnalcık points out the importance of 

 172 ] 
Fatma Kızıl
secondary (idadi) schools in this respect. The French language had already 
been the primary conduit for Western thought throughout the late Ottoman 
period, but the idadi schools greatly expanded French literacy among the intel-
lectual class and consequently accelerated the pace of translation into Turkish 
as well. These schools were also secular, with Muslim and non- Muslim 
(dhimmī) students receiving their education together for the first time.7
Another institution that played an important role in the process of 
Westernising religious education in particular was the Dârülfünûn, the first 
institution of higher education besides the madrasas. The origins of this 
institution stretch back to 1845, but it was re-opened under the name of 
Dârülfünûn-ı Şâhâne in 1900, together with a four-year branch (faculty) of 
Ulûm-i Âliyye-i Dîniyye (Higher Religious Sciences). In 1914, the branch was 
abolished, and its students were transferred to the madrasas of Dârü’l-Hilâfe.8
In the Republican era, a three-year Faculty of Theology was opened at 
Dârülfünûn in 1924. This faculty had been planned as ‘a kind of faculty of 
sociology’,9 which was conceived as a state apparatus that would bring the 
religious sphere into line with Republican reforms, but was closed in 1933 
due to a dearth of students. Over the past half-century, new faculties10 have 
been opened with an ideologically diverse academic staffing. As a result, 
these faculties drifted from the Republican goal of sustaining a single dis-
course in unison. Nonetheless, the founding principle of the first faculty 
continues to contribute to a negative assessment of today’s faculties on the 
part of traditional and conservative elements of society.11
The unresolved issue these faculties face today is the question of how to 
engage in Islamic studies. To a significant extent, they are characterised by a 
hybridity that manifests itself on multiple levels. Since there are not two dis-
tinct majors such as theology and religious studies, the faculties undertake 
the mission of educating the clergy, so to speak, along with academics.12 In 
addition, the curricula of the faculties consist of classes such as sociology of 
religion, psychology of religion and history of religions, which treat their 
subject as a social phenomenon, alongside the traditional subjects of tafsīr, 
fiqh, hadith, Islamic theology (kalām), Sufism and Arabic. Both academics 
with an inclination towards traditional scholarship and the preacher-led 
groups from outside the academy constantly compare the curricula of these 
faculties with the programmes of private foundations and informal madra-
sas that concentrate solely on classical Islamic texts and Arabic. The result-
ing perception is typically that these faculties and their graduates are not 
 qualified to continue the legacy of classical Islamic scholarship.13
Hadith Scholars and Orientalism in Faculties of Theology 
before the 2000s
The methodological hybridity that has generally characterised the facul-
ties of theology has also significantly affected the study of hadith. In the 
curriculum of the Faculty of Theology opened in 1924, one of the courses 

  
Western Hadith Studies in Turkish Academe  
[ 173
was ‘hadīth and history of hadith’. Between 1925 and 1926, İzmirli İsmail 
Hakkı (d. 1946) taught the course and wrote a textbook for it titled Târîkh-i 
ḥadîs (1924), which he described as the first of its kind.14 Traditionalists have 
claimed that İzmirli’s book and the creation of a course on ‘the history of 
hadith’ were reflective of a trend towards treating the classical Islamic sci-
ences as ineffective and irrelevant disciplines in general and reducing hadith 
to mere history in particular.15 İzmirli’s book, however, was largely a regular 
book of muṣṭalaḥ al-ḥadīth in terms of its content and the new course was not 
just on the ‘history of hadith’, but rather on ‘hadith and history of hadith’.16
There is no indication that İzmirli’s approach to the study of hadith 
was directly influenced by Western hadith studies, although he is gener-
ally regarded as one of the more progressive figures among the so-called 
‘Islamists’ of the late Ottoman era.17 He was, however, at least tangentially 
familiar with Islamic studies in the West. He was included in the commis-
sion established by the Ministry of Education to prepare a report on the 
Turkish translation of Reinhart Dozy’s (d. 1883) De Voornaamste Godsdienste: 
Het Islamisme (1863) by Abdullah Cevdet (d. 1932).18 He was also one of 
the authors of İslâm-Türk Ansiklopedisi (‘Islamic–Turkish Encyclopedia’), a 
project conceived of as an indigenous Turkish response to the translation of 
Brill’s Encyclopaedia of Islam (1913–36) in 1940.
Another important contributor to hadith studies in this period was 
Babanzade Ahmed Naim (d. 1934). The Directorate of Religious Affairs 
assigned him the task of translating al-Zabīdī’s (d. 893/1488) al-Tajrīd al-ṣarīḥ 
li-aḥādīth al-Jāmiʿi al-ṣaḥīḥ. Although he ultimately completed only the first 
two of twelve volumes, Ahmed Naim also wrote a one-volume introduc-
tion to the work.19 Under a section titled ‘Hiç de Vechi Olmayan Bir Teşkîk’ 
(‘A Meaningless Doubt’), he criticised several assertions of Leone Caetani 
(d. 1935) concerning the early development of the hadith tradition, including 
the relatively late advent and foreign origins of the isnād and the inefficacy 
of oral transmission.20
Between the closure of the Faculty of Theology in 1933 and the opening 
of a new faculty in Ankara in 1949, the only significant academic work 
on hadith was a single article published by Zakir Kadiri Ugan (d. 1954). 
Although he was neither a faculty member nor a hadith scholar, Ugan was 
the author of the only article on hadith in the faculty journal Dârülfünûn 
İlâhiyat Fakültesi Mecmuası, which was published 1925–33. Ugan’s article, 
‘Dinî ve Gayri Dinî Rivayetler’ (‘Religious and Non-Religious Narrations’), 
can be regarded as a significant precursor to the debates surrounding hadith 
that would unfold subsequently in Turkey. Unlike İzmirli and Arapkirli, 
Ugan is the first scholar who made favourable references to Western schol-
arship on hadith. Ugan argues that hadith scholars prioritised the isnād and 
neglected matn criticism in authenticating hadith.21 In this, he echoed one 
of the well-known assertions of Western hadith scholars, especially Ignaz 
Goldziher (d. 1921), which was also shared by some Islamic modernists like 
Aḥmad Amīn (d. 1954) and Maḥmūd Abū Rayyah (d. 1970).22 According to 

 174 ] 
Fatma Kızıl
Ugan, there were unreliable personalities amongst the Companions and the 
doctrine of the ‘collective probity of the Companions’ (taʿdīl al-ṣaḥābah) had 
led to the acceptance of many fabricated traditions. One of the Companions 
Ugan was particularly interested in was Abū Hurayrah.23 On the basis of 
parallels between the narrations of Abū Hurayrah and Jewish sources, Ugan 
insisted that Abū Hurayrah must have borrowed from the latter. To support 
his negative assessment he enumerates several examples of Western scholars 
whose works contain criticism of this Companion: ‘For example, we could 
mention Goldziher, one of the greatest hadith scholars, Sprenger, de Goeje, 
Dozy, Baron and Kremer [sic], and their followers among Russian scholars: 
Krackowsky and Krymskiy and so on.’24
The Faculty of Theology in Ankara
When the Faculty of Theology was reopened in Ankara in 1949, courses on 
core classical subjects such as fiqh, hadith, tafsīr and Islamic theology were 
not initially included in the curriculum. For this reason, Ahmet Hamdi 
Akseki (d. 1951), the Director of Religious Affairs of the period, maintained 
that the newly opened Faculty of Theology would not be able to train the 
much-needed clergy.25 Since there were no Turkish scholars with doctoral 
degrees at the time, Muhammed Tayyib Okiç (d. 1977), a Bosnian scholar, 
was invited to establish the tafsīr and hadith departments of the faculty. Okiç 
would be the teacher of the first-generation hadith scholars of the Republican 
era.26 He supervised Talât Koçyiğit (1927–2011) and M. Said Hatiboğlu’s 
doctoral dissertations, the first Turkish dissertations on hadith, completed 
in 1957 and 1962, respectively. He was also one of the committee members 
who reviewed Fuad Sezgin’s Buhârî’nin Kaynakları Hakkında Araştırmalar for 
his habilitation in 1954.
Having received his doctorate from the Faculty of Letters at the University 
of Paris (1931), Okiç had an extensive knowledge of Western studies not only 
on hadith but also on other Islamic disciplines as seen in one of his major 
works in Turkish, Bazı Hadis Meseleleri Üzerine Tetkikler (‘Studies on Various 
Hadith Problems’, 1956).27 In this book, Okiç points out the diversity of the 
conclusions reached by Orientalists on the topic of hadith. In Okiç’s opinion, 
even though they cannot be absolutely impartial, there are several moderate 
and unbiased Orientalists. For example, he contrasts the biases of figures like 
Henri Lammens (d. 1937) and Leone Caetani with the relative objectivity of 
a figure like Goldziher.28 On the whole, it seems that Okiç did not engage 
in blanket dismissals of Orientalist scholarship, but evaluated its claims 
on a case-by-case basis. For example, while he objected to Josef Horovitz’s 
(d. 1931) theory regarding the Jewish origin of the isnād system by arguing 
that Horovitz had identified the existence of only a remotely similar system, 
he also took sides with Horovitz against Caetani‘s chronology of the isnād.29 
Unlike Zakir Kadiri Ugan, Okiç seems not to have accepted the majority of 
Orientalists’ critiques of the hadith tradition. He did, however, encourage 

  
Western Hadith Studies in Turkish Academe  
[ 175
his students Talât Koçyiğit and Mehmed Said Hatiboğlu to learn Western 
languages and study Orientalists’ works.30 While these two scholars both 
began work in this field, they would ultimately take Okiç’s encouragement 
in different directions.
Talât Koçyiğit translated four articles by James Robson (d. 1981) into 
Turkish,31 and also critiqued Goldziher’s views in an article titled ‘Analysis 
and Critique of Goldziher’s Several Views on Hadith’.32 Since he did not 
make any comments on Robson’s views anywhere in the translations, 
Koçyiğit’s evaluation of Western hadith studies must be gleaned primarily 
from his article responding to Goldziher.33 While he was willing to admit 
that there were objective Orientalists who engaged in dispassionate research, 
Koçyiğit considered Goldziher to be among those who misrepresented their 
evidence in order to attack Islam, drawing several examples of this from 
Goldziher’s Muhammedanische Studien.34 In one such example, he criticises 
Goldziher’s interpretation of the following report narrated by al-Ṭabarī, 
according to which Muʿāwiyah said to Mughīrah ibn Shuʿbah:
Do not refrain from abusing ʿAli and criticising him, nor from asking God’s 
mercy upon ʿUthman and His forgiveness for him. Continue to shame the 
companions of ʿAli, keep them at a distance, and don’t listen to them. Praise the 
faction of ʿUthman, bring them near, and listen to them.35
Goldziher interprets these words as an official encouragement to promote 
and spread hadith reports against ʿAlī and to suppress those in favour of 
him.36 After pointing out that Muʿāwiyah’s instruction had nothing to do 
with hadith, Koçyiğit reaches the conclusion that ‘Goldziher distorted the 
meaning of this report for the sake of a hidden intention’.37
Another objection of Koçyiğit against Goldziher concerned his allegations 
about the relationship of the prominent hadith scholar al-Zuhrī (d. 124/742) 
with the Umayyads. According to Koçyiğit, Goldziher wanted to show the 
existence of hadith scholars who had fabricated traditions in the service of 
the Umayyads and found al-Zuhrī to be a convenient target. As an example, 
Koçyiğit discusses Goldziher’s argument that al-Zuhrī fabricated the tradi-
tion ‘Do not travel to any mosques except three: al-Masjid al-Ḥarām, this 
mosque of mine, and al-Masjid al-Aqṣā’,38 in order to justify the religio-polit-
ical policies of the Caliph ʿAbd al-Malik (r. 65–86/685–705), who wished to 
substitute Qubbat al-Ṣakhrah for the Kaʿbah as a pilgrimage site in order to 
prevent pilgrims from paying homage to the counter-Caliph ʿAbd Allāh ibn 
al-Zubayr (d. 73/692) in Mecca. Koçyiğit argues that the notion that al-Zuhrī 
fabricated the hadith towards this end is not actually stated in Goldziher’s 
source, al-Yaʿqūbī’s (d. after 292/905) Tārīkh, but is rather a speculative 
inference.39 He also points out that the entire report may be little more than 
an anti-Umayyad polemic since al-Yaʿqūbī was a Shiʿi and the report is not 
corroborated in any other source.40 Furthermore, Koçyiğit makes reference to 
a report in al-Dhahabī’s (d. 748/1348) Tadhkirat al-huffāẓ stating that al-Zuhrī 

 176 ] 
Fatma Kızıl
only met with ʿAbd al-Malik in the year 80/699–700, several years after the 
Second Civil War (60–73/680–692) between ʿAbd Allāh ibn al-Zubayr and 
the Umayyads.41 Koçyiğit concludes his article by advocating an approach to 
Western hadith studies that would combine cautious awareness with a sense 
of distinct academic and confessional communities: ‘Whatever the outcome 
of an Orientalist’s studies about our own issues, we must receive it with 
caution. Of course, we will be aware of their studies, but we will not forget 
that we have to deal with our own issues by ourselves either.’42
The approach of Okiç’s other student, Mehmed Said Hatiboğlu, to Western 
hadith studies is substantially different from that of Koçyiğit. Indeed, his 
dissertation, titled İslami Tenkid Zihniyeti ve Hadis Tenkidinin Doğuşu (‘Critical 
Islamic Thought and the Birth of Hadith Criticism’),43 follows the main 
arguments of Goldziher concerning the reflection of Islam’s early political 
conflicts in the hadith tradition.44 This was especially the case with respect to 
traditions in the genres of future tribulations (fitan) and Portents of the Last 
Hour (ashrāṭ al-sāʿah), concerning which he wrote, ‘It can be accepted that the 
atmosphere of terror created among Muslims by the events after the death of 
the Prophet gave rise to the majority of the material in this genre, especially 
that included under the topics of fitan and ashrāṭ al- sāʿah.’ 45
In his dissertation, Hatiboğlu also refers to works of Sprenger, Caetani, 
Goldziher, Henri Lammens46 and Duncan Black Macdonald (d. 1943), and 
quotes their views. He voices criticism against those scholars only in a 
limited number of instances.47 However, in a later paper, Hatiboğlu also 
accused luminaries of Orientalist scholarship like Snouck Hurgronje (d. 
1936) and Joseph Schacht (d. 1969) of engaging in arbitrary and far-fetched 
interpretations of their sources, arguing that it is necessary to check their 
original sources because of their biases. Nonetheless, these criticisms are on 
the whole eclipsed by his generally favourable approach towards Western 
scholars, especially Goldziher.48
The broad category of fitan traditions continued to be a subject of 
Hatiboğlu’s studies. In his 1967 habilitation book Hazreti Peygamber’in 
(s.a.v) Vefatından Emevilerin Sonuna Kadar Siyasi İçtimai Hadiselerle Hadis 
Münasebetleri (‘Relation of Hadith to Sociopolitical Events from the Death of 
the Prophet until the End of Umayyads’) he argued again that the Prophet 
cannot be the source of fitan traditions.49 In this work and others, we see that 
Hatiboğlu’s rejection of the authenticity of these traditions is part of a larger 
theological project. Echoing a debate that has reverberated in modernist 
circles since the nineteenth century,50 he takes the position that the Prophet 
did not receive any revelation outside of the Qurʾān and rejects the notion of 
‘non-recited revelation’ (waḥy ghayr matlūw), which constituted the classical 
theological foundation for the authority of the Sunnah.51
‘Critical Islamic thought’, the main theme of Hatiboğlu’s dissertation, 
would also become the driving force in his future studies and scholarship. 
He has continued to promote the critical revaluation of Islamic sources 
until today and has influenced a number of modernist scholars who would 

  
Western Hadith Studies in Turkish Academe  
[ 177
later gather around forums and institutions such as the journal İslamiyat 
(1998–2007) and two publishing houses known as Kitabiyat52 (1997–2009) 
and Ankara Okulu Yayınları (1995–).53 These scholars have focused on the 
critical re-valuation of classical Islamic scholarship as a whole and not just 
hadith studies, but nonetheless played a key role in the heated debates over 
hadith literature that became prominent during the 1990s when scholars 
from both the traditional and modernist camps came together in a series of 
symposiums.
Another important scholar connected to the Faculty of Theology in Ankara 
was Fuad Sezgin. Although Sezgin had worked under the supervision of 
Hellmut Ritter (d. 1971) until 1949 and spent most of his academic life in 
Istanbul, he worked at the Faculty of Theology in Ankara in 1951–3. In 
addition, as was mentioned above, Tayyib Okiç was among the commit-
tee members who accepted Sezgin’s habilitation in 1954. In his habilitation, 
Buhârî’nin Kaynakları, Sezgin refuted the chronology given by Goldziher for 
the collection of traditions and emphasised the continuous written transmis-
sion of hadiths.54 Buhârî’nin Kaynakları would become a respected but also 
neglected work over the subsequent years in Turkey.55 In fact, after its first 
publication in 1956, the second edition was published only in 2001. One of the 
main reasons for this was that Sezgin left for Germany in 1961 after he was 
removed from his position at the university due to the military coup of 1960.
In the latter half of the twentieth century, the Faculty of Theology in 
Ankara trained a generation of scholars who followed developments in 
Western hadith studies. During this period, translations from Orientalists 
were published in the faculty journal Ankara Üniversitesi İlâhiyat Fakültesi 
Dergisi. In addition, books by scholars like Julius Wellhausen (d. 1918), 
Goldziher, Schacht and William Montgomery Watt (d. 2006) were translated 
into Turkish and published by the faculty press.56
Hadith Scholars and Orientalism in Faculties of Theology after the 2000s
Parallel to the continued engagement with Western scholarship in Ankara, 
the field of higher religious education diversified significantly with the 
opening of the so-called Higher Institutes of Islam (Yüksek İslam Enstitüleri) 
between 1959 and 1982. These institutes were opened specifically for the 
graduates of imam-hatip schools since the Faculty of Theology in Ankara 
accepted students only from regular high schools.57 Unlike the faculty, these 
institutes followed a curriculum focusing mostly on classical Islamic texts 
and pedagogical formation. However, in 1982, the institutes were trans-
formed into faculties of theology and started to follow a common curriculum 
similar to that of the Faculty of Theology in Ankara. After the transforma-
tion of the institutes into faculties of theology, the total number of faculties 
increased to eight, and fifteen new faculties were opened between 1988 
and 2008. At the beginning of the fall semester, 2017, there were eighty-one 
 faculties of theology that accepted students.58

 178 ] 
Fatma Kızıl
This transformation in the overall landscape of higher Islamic education 
has had a significant and varied impact on the academic study of hadith. On 
the one hand, the increase in the number of programmes for higher educa-
tion in Islamic Studies has gone hand in hand with significant growth in 
the number of academic studies of hadith and other topics within Islamic 
Studies. As for hadith studies, twelve theses were completed in the 1970s, 
sixty-seven theses in the 1980s, 304 in the 1990s and 505 in the first decade of 
the new millennium.59 On the other hand, the opening of these new faculties 
also arguably led to a dilution in the presence and significance of Western 
studies on hadith in the broad sphere of the Turkish academy. The majority 
of the new theses completed since the 1970s focus either on the authority 
and authenticity of the Sunnah or on issues defined within the framework 
of classical hadith scholarship.60 Thus, a recent review of theses on hadith 
completed through 2015 includes the relationship between Orientalism and 
hadith among the understudied subjects in the Turkish academy that require 
more attention.61
There has been, in fact, a small but perceptible increase in engagement with 
Western hadith studies in the faculties of theology in the past twenty years. 
This interest is reflected in part in the considerable increase in the number of 
translations from Western scholars, such as Josef Horovitz, Schacht, Alfred 
Guillaume (d. 1965), James Robson, Meir Jacob Kister (d. 2010), G. H. A. 
Juynboll (d. 2010), Harald Motzki (d. 2019) and Gregor Schoeler. It is also 
reflected in recent doctoral research. A number of dissertations have been 
written specifically on Western hadith studies, while many others are also 
shaped by current debates in Western scholarship in terms of their selection 
of subject matter. One of the most prominent examples of the dissertations 
responding to Western hadith studies is Bekir Kuzudişli’s Hadis Rivâyetinde 
Aile İsnadları (‘Family Isnāds in Hadith Transmission’), completed in 2005. 
Kuzudişli endeavoured to refute Schacht’s claim that family isnāds were fab-
ricated, arguing that such isnāds emerged because written documents were 
kept within the family as souvenirs and handed down to the following gen-
eration.62 He also objected to Schacht’s argument that family isnāds were not 
‘an indication of authenticity but only a device for securing its appearance’63 
by pointing out that hadith scholars did in fact criticise hadiths transmitted 
through family isnāds.64
Another dissertation about Western hadith studies is my own Hukukî 
İçerikli Merfû Hadisler Bağlamında Müşterek Râvî Teorisi ve Tenkidi (‘Critique 
of Common-Link Theory Based on Legal marfūʿ aḥādīth’), completed in 
2011.65 In this dissertation, I compare Schacht and Juynboll’s application of 
the common-link theory with Harald Motzki’s interpretation while employ-
ing a case study to shed light on a variety of assertions connected with the 
common-link theory, such as the material growth of traditions, backward 
projection, gradual improvement of isnāds and the spread of isnāds. I apply 
the method of isnād-cum-matn analysis as developed by Motzki to a selected 
hadith cluster, but, unlike Motzki, while checking variants with each other, 

  
Western Hadith Studies in Turkish Academe  
[ 179
I give the evaluation and judgements of hadith critics about transmitters’ 
reliability a decisive role. In the end, I argue that isnād-cum-matn analysis, 
as applied in the dissertation, is an improved continuation of the muʿāraḍah 
method discussed in classical hadith scholarship.66
The common-link theory and other methods of dating traditions is also the 
subject of Süleyman Doğanay’s habilitation titled Oryantalistlerin Hadisleri 
Tarihlendirmeye Yaklaşımları (‘Orientalists’ Approach to Dating of Traditions’, 
2013).67 The author is critical of Western scholars’ methods of dating hadiths 
throughout the book and offers several case-by-case refutations of their 
claims. After the description of the methods, Doğanay reaches the conclusion 
that Orientalists’ approaches are biased and overly sceptical.68
Despite this recent trend towards increased engagement with Western 
scholarship, the majority of dissertations still discuss only Turkish studies 
and primary and secondary Arabic sources in the compulsory section of 
the literature review. Goldziher continues to be the first name that comes 
to mind when one mentions Orientalism and the most well-known schol-
ars after Goldziher are G. H. A. Juynboll and Harald Motzki.69 The works 
engaging Western scholarship surveyed here serve only as representative 
examples of a larger body of literature that shares the tendency to emphasise 
the biases of Orientalist studies, their misuse of evidence and their over-
looking of important information that does not support their arguments.70 
Academics who offer a more positive appraisal of Orientalist works are 
generally labelled by traditionalists as modernists, rendering Western hadith 
studies a powerful symbolic weapon in the debates over the authority and 
authenticity of hadith.
Scholarly Camps and Topics of Discussion
Debates over the authority and authenticity of hadith in Turkey have given 
rise to three main trends in scholarship: Istanbul-based traditionalists; 
Ankara-based modernists; and finally Kur’ancılar (Ahl al-Qurʾān).71 The main 
issues at stake in the debates among these three trends can be summed up 
as the status of Sunnah in Islam, the authenticity of hadiths and, lastly, how 
to correctly understand the Sunnah in the modern world. While there are no 
hadith scholars among Kur’ancılar, the first two groups consist of academ-
ics specialising in hadith. Today, in different cities of Turkey, scholars from 
both camps work together at the same faculties. Even though the distinc-
tion between Istanbul and Ankara serves primarily as a synecdoche for the 
Faculty of Theology at Marmara (formerly Istanbul Higher Institute of Islam) 
and Ankara University, respectively, in the end, it denotes the approaches 
taken by individual scholars and not necessarily their geographical locations. 
The designation Tarihselci (‘historicalists’)72 is often used by traditionalists 
as an umbrella label to describe their opponents. In particular, the term is 
used to refer to those scholars who argue that rulings and regulations in 
the Qurʾān and Sunnah are not universal but limited to the historical period 

 180 ] 
Fatma Kızıl
and circumstances of the first Islamic community. It thus occurs mostly in 
the discussions of scholars of tafsīr and Islamic law. Fazlur Rahman and 
Naṣr Ḥāmid Abū Zayd (d. 2010) are the authorities appealed to most fre-
quently by Turkish scholars on this issue. It seems that this fact, in addition 
to the translation and publication of Fazlur Rahman’s (d. 1988) books by the 
Ankara Okulu publishing house, have played a role in the generalisation of 
the designation to include all progressive scholars in spite of the significant 
differences among them.
The Kur’ancılar (ahl al-Qurʾān) consist primarily of tafsīr scholars.73 
Technically speaking, this group does not reject the Sunnah completely.74 
Their criterion for accepting Sunnah is that it should be corroborated by the 
Qurʾān, which leads to the rejection of the great bulk of the Sunnah but not 
the rejection of Sunnah as such. Although this camp accepts the Sunnah of the 
Prophet as the best example in principle, they do not specify either its scope 
or how this example could be materialised in daily life.75 Other trends have 
been more concerned with specifying the limits and scope of the Sunnah. 
For both traditionalists and modernists, the debate about the authority of the 
Sunnah has centred on parsing the different roles played by the Prophet and 
determining the normative implications of his actions in each of those roles. 
They discuss the extent to which it is possible to separate his Prophetic role 
from other, mundane roles; whether all of his actions should be considered 
to be based on non-recited revelation; and what these distinctions mean in 
terms of the binding nature and universal applicability of the Sunnah.
In the debates over hadith, the questions of authenticity and interpreta-
tion are intertwined partly because of perceptions of dissonance between the 
standards and expectations of the modern world and the Prophet’s orders 
and practices. A case in point is how the three trends discuss the relationship 
between modern and Prophetic medicine. Scholars who adopt a critical per-
spective dismiss those hadiths that clash with principles of modern medicine 
because they reject the possibility of the Prophet’s saying something that con-
flicts with reason or modern science. On the other hand, some modernists, 
mainly ‘historicalists’, regard such hadiths as authentic but understand them 
as the result of the Prophet’s human and hence historical knowledge instead 
of universal and transcendental revelation. Rejecting both perspectives, most 
of the traditionalists, in turn, believe that the Prophetic medicine has miracu-
lous attributes yet to be discovered by modern science. The views of classical 
scholars are treated as a repository of material that is drawn on selectively 
in order to challenge the opposing sides and accuse them of abandoning the 
Sunnah or the spirit of the Sunnah. While traditionalists argue that rejecting 
the hadiths regarded as authentic by previous generations will pave the way 
to abandoning Sunnah altogether, modernists accuse them of not under-
standing the Prophet or his mission, and hence accepting the hadiths report-
ing words or deeds that he could not have said or done. Therefore, debates 
around the authenticity and understanding of the traditions are inextricably 
bound up with the question of the authority of the Prophet and his Sunnah. 

  
Western Hadith Studies in Turkish Academe  
[ 181
Critical scholars like Mehmet Emin Özafşar, Professor of Hadith at the 
Faculty of Theology in Ankara, emphasise that hadiths should not be viewed 
as the words, deeds and tacit approvals of the Prophet, but rather as words, 
deeds and tacit approvals that have been attributed to him.76 According to 
Özafşar, the reflexive identification of transmitted reports with the Prophet 
leads to emotional reactions against critical attitudes towards hadith, and 
hence hinders rational argumentation.77
For critical scholars, the notion that content criticism is necessary goes 
hand in hand with the conviction that isnād criticism alone is insufficient to 
determine the authenticity of a hadith. These scholars have discussed the 
methods of content criticism extensively, which is referred to in Turkish 
by the term ‘arz’, meaning comparison of the contents of a hadith with the 
Qurʾān, well-established Sunnah, reason, historical facts and the hard sci-
ences. As a matter of fact, each of these types of arz was treated in distinct 
doctoral dissertations between 1997 and 2008.
The occurrence of a significant number of traditions in the Ṣaḥīḥayn 
criticised by the modernists on the basis of content criticism also gave rise to 
discussions about the reliability of these two canonical sources. A paper on 
the reliability of the Ṣaḥīḥayn by Yaşar Kandemir,78 one of the leading schol-
ars of the traditionalists, and its review by Mehmed Said Hatiboğlu can be 
described as the emblematic works in which the positions of the two oppos-
ing camps became crystallised.79
Lastly, Hayri Kırbaşoğlu merits mention as the most vocal and prolific 
author among critical scholars. His 1995 paper consists of a summary of the 
main arguments of critical scholars.80 In this paper, Kırbaşoğlu defends the 
re-valuation of traditions, and prefers the designation ‘progressive’ instead 
of ‘modernist’.81 He states that viewing progressive scholarship as a direct 
result of Orientalists’ influence leads to ignoring the problems originating 
from the hadith literature itself. Kırbaşoğlu also argues against the accept-
ance of the classical science of hadith criticism as the final method that cannot 
be criticised or changed.82
In 2002, Kırbaşoğlu published his Alternatif Hadis Metodolojisi (‘Alternative 
Methodology of Hadith’), which drew on the results of the theses he had 
supervised over the years.83 His main focus in the book was dogmatic tradi-
tions that he regarded as either later fabrications or distortions, mostly on the 
basis of the argumentum e silentio.84 For example, he reached the conclusion 
that the so-called hadith of Jibrīl85 was not known or not taken  seriously by 
most of the hadith scholars in the first centuries or was regarded as fabricated 
based on its absence from sources such as Maʿmar ibn Rāshid (d. 153/770?), 
al-Jāmiʿ, Mālik (d. 179/795), al-Muwattaʾ, and ʿAbd al-Razzāq (d. 211/827), 
al-Muṣannaf.86 Having insisted on the importance of content  criticism, 
Kırbaşoğlu argued that this method was used by the leading companions, 
the Muʿtazilah, and also several mujtahids, including Abū Ḥanīfah.87 But, 
according to him, this method was forgotten due to ‘the hegemony of the 
classical science of hadith based on the ahl al-ḥadīth/Shāfiʿī school’.88 The 

 182 ] 
Fatma Kızıl
work of Kırbaşoğlu, along with other scholars at the Faculty of Theology 
in Ankara, demonstrates the lasting influence of Mehmet Said Hatiboğlu 
within the school of Ankara (Ankara Okulu).89
Conclusion
The first Turkish translation from Western studies of Islam, Dozy’s De 
Voornaamste Godsdienste: Het Islamisme, was published in the late Ottoman 
era. In the Republican era, another work, Caetani’s Annali dell’Islam was trans-
lated into Turkish. While the intellectuals of the Ottoman and Republican 
eras accepted the necessity of Westernisation in varying degrees, they have 
taken a critical stance against Orientalists’ works since the first translations. 
The first exception to this critical position was Zakir Kadiri Ugan, who 
voiced views similar to those of Orientalists about several important aspects 
of hadith literature. Although his scholarship was not as receptive as that of 
Ugan, Mehmed Said Hatiboğlu, one of the first-generation hadith scholars of 
the Republican era, was another exception. Hatiboğlu based his dissertation 
and habilitation on Goldziher’s main thesis about the relation of hadiths to 
political events of the first two Islamic centuries. On the other hand, Talât 
Koçyiğit, Hatiboğlu’s colleague at the Faculty of Theology in Ankara and 
the author of the first Turkish dissertation on hadith, remained critical of 
Western hadith scholarship, and it is still the prevalent attitude among 
Turkish scholars towards Orientalists’ works.
Western hadith studies also have a role in the debates between tradi-
tionalist and progressive/modernist hadith scholars. Departure from the 
prevalent critical attitude against Orientalism is generally associated with 
Islamic modernism. Even though they might not be as fervent as in the 1990s, 
debates between traditionalist and modernist hadith scholars continue to be 
a driving force of academic debate in the field of Islamic Studies in Turkey, 
mostly because all parties consider defending their position is not just an 
academic but also a religious duty. The modernists devote nearly all of their 
attention to collecting problematic material that would justify revisiting 
the traditions accepted as authentic by scholars of previous generations. 
Traditionalists, in turn, not only dedicate most of their time to answering or 
explaining away the questions and criticisms voiced by the modernists, but 
also deny justified criticisms in order to avoid strengthening the position 
of their opponents. It seems that primary responsibility for breaking this 
vicious circle lies with the critical scholars. If they take a revisionist approach 
to the sources and compose their hadith collections using the new methods 
they propose in place of classical hadith criticism, it might lead to a more 
honest discussion between both parties. But it should be noted that sorting 
through the traditions would inevitably lead to a new fiqh and theology as 
well. Maybe this is why critical scholars in Turkey are unwilling to carry out 
their proposals.
As for Western influence on modern hadith debates in Turkey, this 

  
Western Hadith Studies in Turkish Academe  
[ 183
influence took the form of a major shift in the worldview especially due to 
Westernisation of the Second Constitutional Period in which Westernisation 
of the Republic of Turkey also had its origins. Turkish hadith scholars were 
inevitably affected by this transformation. On the other hand, it is difficult 
to determine any direct influence of Western hadith studies except for Zakir 
Kadiri Ugan and Mehmet Said Hatiboğlu’s scholarship. Rather, it could be 
said that modern hadith discussions in Turkey have always been more of an 
extension of those in the Indian subcontinent and Egypt, turning progres-
sive hadith scholarship of Turkish academics into a second-hand Islamic 
modernism.
Notes
 1. On Atatürk’s (d. 1938) policy of Garblılaşma, see Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, 
Atatürk’ün Söylev ve Demeçleri, 3 vols (Ankara: Atatürk Araştırma Merkezi 
Yayınları, 1997), 3:91.
 2. Turkey’s first step towards laicism was the exclusion of the sentence ‘The reli-
gion of the state is Islam’ from the Constitution in 1928. Afterwards, in 1937, 
the principle of laicism was added to the Constitution. The language reforms 
adopted consisted of purifying Turkish of loanwords and adopting the Latin 
alphabet instead of the Ottoman Turkish.
 3. Şükrü Hanioğlu emphasises the difference between the Garbcılık of the 
Second Constitutional and Republican periods and a more general process 
of Westernisation, which started as early as the reign of Selim III (r. 1789–
1807). See M. Şükrü Hanioğlu, ‘II. Meşrutiyet Dönemi ‘Garbcılığı’nın 
Kavramsallaştırılmasındaki Üç Temel Sorun Üzerine Not’, Doğu Batı Düşünce 
Dergisi 31 (2005): 55–64, at 57.
 4. M. Şükrü Hanioğlu, A Brief History of the Late Ottoman Empire (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 2008), 138.
 5. Kılıçzâde was born in Niş (today’s Niš in Serbia) and studied in Mühendishâne-i 
Berrî-i Hümâyun, an engineering school that educated engineer and artillery offic-
ers. In the Ottoman era, materialism and positivism were prevalent among stu-
dents of Mühendishaneler (engineering schools) and Tıbbiyeler (medical schools). 
Almost all the prominent figures among the so-called Garbcılar (Westernisers) 
were graduates of these institutions. For Kılıçzâde’s life and views, see Celal 
Pekdoğan, ‘Kılıçzâde Hakkı’, in TDV İslâm Ansiklopedisi, 44 vols (İstanbul: 
Türkiye Diyanet Vakfı, 1988–2013), 25: 415–16.
 6. See Hanioğlu, Brief History, 185.
 7. Halil İnalcık, ‘II. Meşrutiyet’, Doğu Batı Düşünce Dergisi 45 (2008): 11–16, at 13. 
Most of the intellectuals of the late Ottoman period spoke French as a foreign lan-
guage. This continued in the Republican era; for example, Fuad Köprülü (1890–
1966), who was among the graduates of idadis during the Second Constitutional 
Period and later minister of foreign affairs in the Republican era, gave his speech 
in French at the twenty-second International Congress of Orientalists (R. N. 
Dandekar, ‘The Twenty-Second International Congress of Orientalists, Istanbul, 

 184 ] 
Fatma Kızıl
15th–22nd September, 1951’, Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 
32(1) (1951): i–xxiv, at vii). In one of his interviews, Atatürk also acknowledged 
French influence on the Ottoman intellectuals by saying ‘We all had drunk from 
the spring of French culture.’ See Atatürk, Atatürk’ün Söylev 3:89–90.
 8. İbrahim Hatiboğlu argued that in the Dârülfünûn Muslims learned to look at 
Islamic issues as ‘outsiders’ (İbrahim Hatiboğlu, ‘Transmission of Western 
Hadīth Critique to Turkey: On the Past and the Future of Academic Hadīth 
Studies’, Hadis Tetkikleri Dergisi 4(2) (2006): 37–53, at 40). This is, however, a sim-
plistic presentation of the issue. For example, the Branch and madrasas of Dârü’l-
Hilâfe both followed a similar curriculum (Halis Ayhan, Türkiye’de Din Eğitimi 
(İstanbul: Marmara Üniversiteis İlahiyat Fakültesi Vafkı Yayınları, 1999), 39).
 9. İsmail Hakkı Baltacıoğlu (d. 1978), the Chancellor of Dârülfünûn, described 
the faculty as ‘some kind of faculty of sociology’ (M. Ali Kirman, ‘Türk 
Modernleşmesi ve Yüksek Din Eğitimi’, in Tahsin Özcan et al. (eds), Darülfünun 
İlahiyat Sempozyumu 18–19 Kasım 2009 Tebliğleri (İstanbul: İstanbul Üniversitesi 
İlahiyat Fakültesi, 2010), 58).
10. In Turkey, ‘Faculty of Divinity’ and ‘Faculty of Theology’ are used interchange-
ably. I have used the latter exclusively, although some faculties prefer ‘Faculty of 
Divinity’ on their websites.
11. In his speech on re-opening of the Faculty of Theology in 1949, Baltacıoğlu admit-
ted that mistakes had been made in 1924 for political reasons and emphasised the 
importance of religious formation for character-building (Ayhan, Türkiye’de Din, 
21). Today, most vocal critics of faculties of theology are preachers and their 
followers outside the academy. Sometimes, these preachers publicly enter into 
polemics with various academics, mostly using social media.
12. While some of these faculty graduates continue their studies at the post-graduate 
level and become faculty members, most of the graduates work as teachers of 
religion (a compulsory course in the last year of elementary school, and through-
out secondary and high school), imams (only male students) or preachers (both 
male and female students) under the Directorate of Religious Affairs.
13. Those who criticise the faculties of theology on the grounds that they are not the 
continuation of madrasas do not propose any viable alternative. Since they were 
officially closed in the Republican era, the madrasas continued their activities 
‘underground’, especially in the eastern part of Turkey. Their relative lack of 
formal organisation prevents them from taking the necessary steps to improve 
their curricula.
14. İzmirli İsmail Hakkı, Hadis Tarihi (İstanbul: Darülhadis, 2002), 283. This course 
was also taught by Arapkirli Hüseyin Avni (d. 1954).
15. For example, see Mehmet Emin Özafşar, ‘Hadisin Neliği Sorunu ve Akademik 
Hadisçilik’, İslâmîyât 9(1–4) (2006): 147–66, at 158–9; Hatiboğlu, ‘Transmission of 
Western Hadīth Critique to Turkey’, 41ff.
16. See İzmirli, Hadis Tarihi, pp. 281–3. İzmirli, for his part, states at the end of his 
book that the subjects of hadith and history of hadith are the same and that the 
only difference between them is their classification of the same subject according 
to topics or periods, respectively.

  
Western Hadith Studies in Turkish Academe  
[ 185
17. Those who study the intellectual history of the late Ottoman Empire classify intel-
lectuals of this era according to their political–religious positions as Ottomanists, 
Westernisers, Islamists and Turkists. See İsmail Kara, Din ile Modernleşme 
Arasında Çağdaş Türk Düşüncesinin Meseleleri (İstanbul: Dergah Yayınları, 2012), 
39. The Islamists or Islamic revivalists believed that the way of saving the empire 
was through religious revival. They criticised the radical Westernisation and 
the materialist scientism of the likes of Bahâ Tevfik (d. 1914) and Abdullah 
Cevdet (d. 1932), but also argued for the necessity of modernisation in religious 
disciplines. On İzmirli’s views in particular, see M. Sait Özervarlı, ‘Alternative 
Approaches to Modernization in the Late Ottoman Period: İzmirli İsmail Hakkı’s 
Religious Thought against Materialist Scientism’, International Journal of Middle 
East Studies 39 (2007): 77–102.
18. Ali Birinci, ‘İzmirli, İsmail Hakkı’, in TDV İslâm Ansiklopedisi (İstanbul: Türkiye 
Diyanet Vakfı, 2001), 23:530–3, at 531. Because Dozy’s Het Islamisme and Caetani’s 
Annali dell’Islam were translated into Turkish in 1908 and 1924–7, respectively, 
Dozy and Caetani were among the most well-known Orientalists in that period, 
for which, see M. Şükrü Hanioğlu, ‘Garbcılar: Their Attitudes toward Religion 
and Their Impact on the Official Ideology of Turkish Republic’, Studia Islamica 86 
(1997): 133–58, at 139.
19. Ahmed ez-Zebîdî, Sahîh-i Buhârî Muhtasarı Tecrîd-i Sarîh Tercemesi ve Şerhi, 
trans. Ahmed Naim and Kâmil Miras, 12 vols (Ankara: Diyanet İşleri Başkanlığı 
Yayınları, 1976). The first edition was published 1928–48. Kâmil Miras (d. 1957), 
the translator of the remaining volumes, revised the drafts of the third volume 
completed by Ahmed Naim after the latter’s death.
20. ez-Zebîdî, Sahîh-i Buhârî Muhtasarı 1:74ff.
21. Zakir Kadiri Ugan, ‘Dinî Rivâyetler’, İstanbul Üniversitesi İlahiyat Fakültesi Dergisi 
4 (2002): 207–57, at 221–2, 241. For an attenuation of this claim, see Jonathan A. C. 
Brown, ‘How We Know Early Ḥadīth Critics Did Matn Criticism and Why It’s So 
Hard to Find’, Islamic Law and Society 15 (2008): 143–84. Brown suggests that the 
term ‘content criticism’ more accurately captures the type of analysis intended 
by Western scholars than ‘textual criticism’.
22. For Aḥmad Amīn and Abū Rayyah’s views on matn criticisim, see Aḥmad Amīn, 
Fajr al-Islām (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿArabī, 1969), 217ff; Maḥmūd Abū Rayyah, 
Adwāʾ ʿalá al-sunnah al-muḥammadīyah (Cairo: Dār al-Maʿārif, n.d.), 258, 262–5. 
See also G. H. A. Juynboll, The Authenticity of the Tradition Literature: Discussions 
in Modern Egypt (Leiden: Brill, 1969), 43.
23. Ugan, ‘Dinî Rivâyetler’, 241, 243. For Abū Rayyah’s criticisms of the doctrine of 
the collective probity of the Companions and of Abū Hurayrah, see Adwāʾ, 180–3, 
312ff.
24. Ugan, ‘Dinî Rivâyetler’, 248.
25. Ahmed Hamdi Akseki, ‘Dinî Müesseseler ve Din Eğitiminin Meselelerine Dair 
Rapor’, in İsmail Kara (ed.), Türkiye’de İslâmcılık Düşüncesi: Metinler Kişiler, 
3 vols (İstanbul: Kitabevi, 1997), 2:378. The fact that graduates of imam-hatip 
(high schools with extra courses on Islamic sciences) were not accepted to the 
Faculty shows that its primary purpose was not to train the clergy. For the 

 186 ] 
Fatma Kızıl
higher religious education of the graduates of imam-hatip schools, Yüksek İslam 
Enstitüleri (Higher Institutes of Islam) were established between 1959 and 1982. 
In 1982, all the institutes were transformed into faculties of theology.
26. İbrahim Hatiboğlu, ‘Okiç, Muhammed Tayyib’, in TDV İslâm Ansiklopedisi, 44 
vols (İstanbul: Türkiye Diyanet Vakfı, 1988–2013), 33:336–8, at 337.
27. E.g., see Tayyib Okiç, Bazı Hadis Meseleleri Üzerine Tetkikler (İstanbul: Ankara 
Üniversitesi İlahiyat Fakültesi Yayınları, 1959), 5–6, 8–10, 28, 32–3.
28. Okiç, Bazı Hadis, 6.
29. Okiç, Bazı Hadis, 9.
30. İbrahim Hatiboğlu, ‘M. Said Hatiboğlu ile M. Tayyib Okiç’in İlmi Kişiliği ve 
Tesirleri Üzerine’, Hadis Tetkikleri Dergisi 5(2) (2007): 169–82, at 176.
31. In order of translation dates, these articles are ‘The Transmission of Muslim’s 
Ṣaḥīh’, Ankara Üniversitesi İlâhiyat Fakültesi Dergisi 4(3/4) (1955): 8–20; ‘The 
Transmission of Abū Dāwūd’s Sunan’, Ankara Üniversitesi İlâhiyat Fakültesi 
Dergisi 5(1–4) (1958): 173–82; ‘Ibn Isḥāq’s Use of the Isnād’, Ankara Üniversitesi 
İlâhiyat Fakültesi Dergisi 10 (1962): 117–26; and ‘Varieties of Hasan Tradition’, 
Ankara Üniversitesi İlâhiyat Fakültesi Dergisi 11 (1963): 109–18.
32. Talât Koçyiğit, ‘I. Goldziher’in Hadisle İlgili Bazı Görüşlerinin Tahlil ve Tenkidi’, 
Ankara Üniversitesi İlâhiyat Fakültesi Dergisi 15 (1967): 43–55. Talât Koçyiğit’s dis-
sertation was Hadislerin Toplanması ve Yazıyla Tespiti (‘Collection and Writing 
down of Traditions’). Koçyiğit, who worked in various positions at the faculty 
until his retirement, played a great role in the standardisation of hadith terminol-
ogy in Turkish with his books on the history of hadith and hadith methodology. 
He maintained his traditionalist position in the Department of Hadith at the 
Faculty of Theology in Ankara, which is labelled as modernist by its traditional-
ist opponents.
33. In his article titled ‘İslâm Hadisinde İsnad ve Hadis Râvilerinin Cerhi’ (‘Isnād in 
Islamic Tradition and Criticism of Hadith Transmitters’), Koçyiğit also objects to 
the chronology of isnāds given by Joseph Schacht and argues that the fitnah in Ibn 
Sīrīn’s famous statement about the origins of the isnād is the Second Civil War 
(60–73/680–92). See Talât Koçyiğit, ‘İslâm Hadisinde İsnad ve Hadis Râvilerinin 
Cerhi’, Ankara Üniversitesi İlâhiyat Fakültesi Dergisi 9 (1961): 47–57, at 50.
34. Koçyiğit, ‘I. Goldziher’in Hadisle’, 43.
35. For this report, see Muḥammad ibn Jarīr al-Ṭabarī, Tārīkh al-rusūl wa-al-mulūk, 
ed. Muḥammad Abū al-Faḍl Ibrāhīm, Dhakhāʾir al-ʿArab 30, 11 vols (Cairo: Dār 
al-Maʿārif, 1960–77), 5:253–4, s.a. 51. For the translation, see History of al-Ṭabarī, 
vol. 18: Between Civil Wars: The Caliphate of Muʿāwiyah a.d. 661–680/a.h. 40–60, 
trans. Michael G. Morony, Bibliotheca Persica and SUNY Series in Near Eastern 
Studies (Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1987), 123.
36. Ignaz Goldziher, Muslim Studies, ed. S. M. Stern, trans. S. M. Stern and G. R. 
Barber, 2 vols (London: Allen & Unwin, 1971), 2:44.
37. Koçyiğit, ‘I. Goldziher’in Hadisle’, 46.
38. For the narrations coming from Zuhrī in the pre-canonical sources, see ʿAbd 
al-Razzāq b. Hammām al-Ṣanʿānī, al-Muṣannaf, ed. Ḥabīb al-Raḥmān al-ʿAzamī, 
10 vols (Beirut: al-Majlis al-ʿIlmī, 1392/1972), 5:132, No. 9158; Abū Bakr ibn 

  
Western Hadith Studies in Turkish Academe  
[ 187
ʿAbd Allāh ibn al-Zubayr al-Ḥumaydī, al-Musnad, ed. Ḥusayn Salīm Asad, 2 
vols (Damascus: Dār al-Saqā, 1996), 2:181, No. 973; Abū Bakr ʿAbd Allāh ibn 
Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm Ibn Abī Shaybah, al-Muṣannaf, ed. Kamāl Yūsuf al-Ḥūt, 
7 vols (Beirut: Dār al-Tāj, 1409/1989), 3:418–19; Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal, al-Musnad, 
ed. Shuʿayb al-Arnaʾūṭ et al. (Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Risālah, 1416–21/1995–2001), 
12:116, 191, also 13:165. For narrations in al-kutub al-sittah, see al-Bukhārī, Ṣaḥīḥ, 
faḍl al-ṣalāh fī masjid Makkah wa-al-Madīnah 1, bāb faḍl al-ṣalāh fī masjid Makkah 
wa-al-Madīnahi, No. 1189; Muslim, Ṣaḥīḥ, al-ḥajj 95, bāb lā tushaddu al-riḥāl illā ilá 
thalāthat masājīd, No. 511; Abū Dāwūd, Sunan, al-manāsīk 94, bāb ityān al-Madīna, 
No. 2026; al-Nasāʾī, Mujtabá, al-masājīd 10, bāb mā tushaddu al-riḥāl ilayhi min 
al-masājid, No. 700; Ibn Mājah, Sunan, iqāmat al-ṣalāh 196, bāb mā jāʾa fi al-ṣalāh fī 
masjid Bayt al-Maqdīs, No. 1409.
39. In the edition of al-Tārīkh (ed. M. T. Houtsma, 2 vols [Leiden: Brill, 1883], 2: 
311) used by Goldziher, it is said that ʿAbd al-Malik had prevented the people 
of al-Shām from visiting Mecca because of ʿAbd Allāh ibn al-Zubayr. It is also 
reported that upon the people’s protest, ʿAbd al-Malik said: ‘Here! Ibn Shihāb 
transmits to you that the Prophet of God said, “Do not set out on a journey except 
for three mosques: al-Masjid al-Ḥarām, the masjid of mine, and Bayt al-Maqdis.” 
Bayt al-Maqdis serves as the substitute to you for al-Masjid al-Ḥarām. And this 
rock which the Prophet is reported to have set his foot on while ascending to 
Heaven also substitutes for the Kaʿba.’
40. Koçyiğit, ‘I. Goldziher’in Hadisle’, 50. Koçyiğit’s arguments parallel those of other 
Western scholars. S. M. Stern, the editor and co-translator of Muhammedanische 
Studien, describes this report as an ‘anti-Umayyad invention’: ‘There is no doubt 
that in this extreme form, according to which ʿAbd al-Malik intended to substi-
tute the pilgrimage to Jerusalem for the ḥajj, the tradition is an anti-Umayyad 
invention; yet it is not impossible that the Umayyads had a share in the propa-
gation of traditions supporting the holiness of Jerusalem’ (Goldziher, Muslim 
Studies 2:45). For Goitein’s refutation of Goldziher’s claim, see S. D. Goitein and 
O. Grabar, ‘al-Ḳuds’, in P. Bearman et al. (eds), Encyclopaedia of Islam, new edition 
(Leiden: Brill, 1960–2004), 5:325.
41. Al-Dhahabī, Tadhkirat al-ḥuffāẓ, 4 vols (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmīyah, n.d.), 
1:109ff. Muṣṭafá al-Sibāʿī (d. 1964) refuted Goldziher’s claims about al-Zuhrī 
using similar arguments. See Juynboll, Authenticity of the Tradition Literature, 
109–12.
42. Koçyiğit, ‘I. Goldziher’in Hadisle’, 55.
43. The dissertation, completed in 1962, was published for the first time in 2015. See 
Mehmed Said Hatiboğlu, İslami Tenkid Zihniyeti (Ankara: Otto, 2016).
44. Hatiboğlu’s translation of the second volume of Muhammedanische Studien, based 
on its French edition, has been published (Ankara: Otto, 2019).
45. Hatiboğlu, İslami Tenkid Zihniyeti, 60. He revised his view in his recent book as 
follows: ‘The evidence we give from Qurʾān and Sunna, naturally, will lead us to 
the conclusion of regarding the reports about future events not mentioned in the 
Qurʾān as inauthentic’ (Mehmed Said Hatiboğlu, Hz. Peygamber ve Kur’an Dışı 
Vahiy (Ankara: Otto, 2017), 157).

 188 ] 
Fatma Kızıl
46. Hatiboğlu describes Lammens as a ‘fierce enemy of Islam’ (Hatiboğlu, İslami, 
34).
47. He rejects Henri Lammens’ claim that ʿUmar (d. 23/644) ordered the murder of 
Saʿd ibn ʿUbādah (d. 14/635) (İslami, 35) and Goldziher’s well-known argument 
that Muslims did not consider mutūn in their hadith criticism (İslami, 112, 134). 
He also states that isnād criticism started well before Goldziher assumed (ibid., 
113). According to Hatiboğlu, isnād criticism must have started well before the 
time Ibn Sīrīn (d. 110/729) began to narrate hadiths since he said ‘they’ instead of 
‘we’ in his well-known saying ‘They did not ask about the isnād, but when fitnah 
arose they said, “Name for us your men.”’
48. M. Said Hatiboğlu, ‘Batı’da Hadis Çalışmaları Üzerine’, in Uluslararası Birinci 
İslam Araştırmaları Sempozyumu Tebliğler ve Müzakereler (İzmir: Dokuz Eylül 
Üniversitesi, 1985), 81–94. Even Goldziher was not completely spared from criti-
cism. For example, Hatiboğlu charges that Goldziher mistakenly believed the 
customary inclusion of the word ‘al-ḥadīth’ at the end of a truncated transmission 
to be part of it.
49. Mehmed Said Hatiboğlu, Hz. Peygamber’in Vefatından Emevilerin Sonuna Kadar 
Siyasi İçtimai Hâdiselerle Hadîs Münasebetleri (Ankara: Otto, 2016), 19.
50. See Daniel Brown, Rethinking Tradition in Modern Islamic Thought (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1996), 43, 51–9.
51. Hatiboğlu develops this view in a separate book published in 2009 titled 
Hz. Peygamber ve Kur’an Dışı Vahiy (‘The Prophet and Revelation outside the 
Qurʾān’). On waḥy ghayr matlūw, see al-Shāfiʿī, al-Umm, ed. Rifʿat Fawzī ʿAbd 
al-Muṭṭalib, 11 vols (Mansoura: Dār al-Wafāʾ, 2001), 3:11; Abū Bakr al-Sarakhsī, 
Uṣūl al-Sarakhsī, ed. Abū al-Wafā al-Afghānī, 2 vols (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub 
al-ʿIlmīyah, 1414/1903), 2:90–1.
52. Since 2009, Otto, the publisher of Mehmed Said Hatiboğlu’s works, has contin-
ued Kitabiyat’s line.
53. Lütfi Sever, one of the founders of the Ankara Okulu Yayınları, previously 
worked with another publisher Fecr Yayınevi. The first book he published while 
working at Fecr Yayınevi was Muhammed Abduh’s (d. 1905) Kitāb al-Tawḥīd.
54. M. Fuad Sezgin, Buhârî’nin Kaynakları Hakkında Araştırmalar (İstanbul: İbrahim 
Horoz, 1956; repr. Ankara: Kitabiyat, 2000), 23–6, 53, 59, 81–2, 88–9.
55. Studies on the sources of other hadith collections have started to be carried out 
recently. For a study on the sources of Muslim’s (d. 261/875) Ṣaḥīḥ, see Dilek 
Tekin, ‘Yazılı-Şifâhî Rivâyet Bağlamında Müslim’in Eser Sahibi Hocalarından 
Rivâyeti’, unpublished PhD thesis, Marmara University, 2015.
56. Wellhausen’s Das arabische Reich und sein Sturz in 1963, W. Montgomery Watt’s 
Islamic Theology and Philosophy and Muhammad at Mecca in 1968 and 1986, respec-
tively, Schacht’s An Introduction to Islamic Law in 1977, Goldziher’s Die Zâhiriten 
in 1982.
57. Ali Fuat Başgil (d. 1967), the politician and professor of law who proposed the 
opening of higher institutes of Islam, made a distinction between theologians 
educated at the Faculty of Theology and religious scholars to be educated 
at these institutions. According to Başgil, those who learn the philosophy of 

  
Western Hadith Studies in Turkish Academe  
[ 189
religion and sociology of religion could become specialists or philosophers but 
not religious scholars. See Ayhan, Türkiye’de Din Eğitimi, 226.
58. A few of these faculties have programmes with courses held only in Arabic. For 
the experiences of these programmes, see Muhammet Beyler, ‘Tajārib kullīyāt 
al-ilāhīyāt/al-ʿulūm al-islāmīyah fī tadrīs al-ʿulūm al-islāmīyah bi-al-lughat al-ʿarabīyah 
fī jāmiʿāt Turkīyah: Birnāmaj al-ḥadīth wa-ʿulūmihi anmūdhajan’, Hadis Tetkikleri 
Dergisi 14(1) (2016): 51–73.
59. For the catalogue of the theses in Islamic studies between 1953 and 2015, see 
İsmail E. Erünsal et al., İlâhiyat Fakültesi Tezler Kataloğu (1953–2015) (İstanbul: 
Türkiye Diyanet Vakfı İslam Araştırmaları Merkezi, 2017). For an online cata-
logue, see at: http://ktp2.isam.org.tr/?blm=arailhtez&navdil=tr.
60. Salahattin Polat, ‘Modern Dönemde Hadis İlminin Temel Meseleleri’, in Modern 
Dönemde Dinî İlimlerin Temel Meseleleri – İlmî Toplantı (İstanbul: Türkiye Diyanet 
Vakfı İslam Araştırmaları Merkezi, 2007), 211–48, at 218–19; Halit Özkan, 
‘Cumhuriyet Dönemi Hadis Çalışmaları: Bir Hasıla’, Türkiye Araştırmaları 
Literatür Dergisi 11(21) (2013): 9–39, at 30.
61. Özkan, ‘Cumhuriyet Dönemi Hadis Çalışmaları: Bir Hasıla’, 31.
62. Bekir Kuzudişli, Hadis Rivâyetinde Aile İsnadları (İstanbul: İşaret Yayınları, 2007), 
129ff. Nabia Abbott also drew attention to the close relationship between the 
written documents and family isnāds. See Nabia Abbott, Studies in Arabic Literary 
Papyri, vol. 2: Quranic Commentary and Tradition (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1967), 1, 37.
63. Joseph Schacht, The Origins of Muhammadan Jurisprudence (Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1950, repr. 1975), 170.
64. Kuzudişli, Hadis Rivâyetinde Aile İsnadları, 498ff.
65. Fatma Kızıl, ‘Hukukî İçerikli Merfû Hadisler Bağlamında Müşterek Râvî Teorisi 
ve Tenkidi’, PhD thesis, Uludağ University, 2011. The dissertation was published 
in 2013 with the title Müşterek Râvi Teorisi ve Tenkidi (İstanbul: Türkiye Diyanet 
Vakfı İslam Araştırmaları Merkezi, 2013).
66. Other dissertations on Western hadith studies or that substantially cited 
Western scholars’ works include the following: Sabri Kızılkaya, ‘İsnad ve Metin 
Çözümlemeleri Bağlamında Geleneksel ve Yeni Yaklaşımlar’ (‘Traditional and 
New Approaches in the Context of Isnād and Matn Analyses’), PhD thesis, 
Ankara University, 2008; Kudrat Artikbaev, ‘Rus Oryantalistlerin Hadis ve 
Siyer Çalışmaları’ (‘Studies of Russian Orientalists on Hadith and Sīra’), PhD 
thesis, Ankara University, 2010; and Sultanbek Aliyev, ‘Rus Oryantalistlerin 
İslâmi İlimlerle İlgili Çalışmaları ve Hadis/Sünnete Yaklaşımları’ (‘Studies of 
Russian Orientalists on Islam and Their Approach to Hadith/Sunnah’), PhD 
thesis, Erciyes University, 2016. In addition, Rahile Yılmaz discusses Orientalists’ 
dating of the Muwattaʾ and their arguments about mursal isnāds in her disserta-
tion. See Rahile Yılmaz, ‘Modern Hadis Tartışmaları Bağlamında Muvatta’daki 
Mürsel Rivâyetler’ (‘Mursal Hadīths in the Muwattaʾ in the Context of Modern 
Hadīth Discussions’), PhD thesis, Marmara University, 2014.
67. Süleyman Doğanay, Oryantalistlerin Hadisleri Tarihlendirmeye Yaklaşımları 
(İstanbul: Marmara Üniversitesi İlahiyat Fakültesi Yayınları, 2013).

 190 ] 
Fatma Kızıl
68. Doğanay, Oryantalistlerin Hadisleri Tarihlendirmeye Yaklaşımları, 226. Besides the 
dissertations and habilitations, there are also an increasing number of articles 
about Western hadith studies after the 2000s. For example, see Halit Özkan, ‘The 
Common Link and Its Relation to the Madār’, Islamic Law and Society 11(1) (2004): 
42–77. In this article, Özkan objects to Juynboll’s assertion that the term madār in 
classical hadith terminology is the equivalent of the common link. Some of his 
main arguments are as follows: (a) the dates given for madārs go back to nearly 
forty years earlier than those of Juynboll’s first common links; (b) unlike the 
common link, there could be more than one madār for a single hadith and more 
than one strand below the madārs.
69. See Hüseyin Akgün, Goldziher ve Hadis (Ankara: Araştırma Yayınları, 2014).
70. For a literature review of Turkish academics’ work on Western hadith studies, see 
Fatma Kızıl, ‘Türkiye’de Hadis Çalışmaları ve Oryantalizm’, Türkiye Araştırmaları 
Literatür Dergisi 11(21) (2013): 303–31.
71. My use of these labels is based on the usage current among the three compet-
ing trends. Curiously, while the first group is described as ‘traditionalist’ both 
by the group itself and its opponents, the two other labels are used only by the 
opponents of the group in question. I have tried to use ‘critical scholars’ or ‘pro-
gressive scholars’ as much as possible instead of ‘modernists’, since no scholars 
referred to as modernist by their opponents accept this designation. As for the 
traditionalists in Turkey, even though the term ‘late Sunnī traditionalists’ coined 
by Jonathan Brown is more precise, I used ‘traditionalists’ in keeping with the 
usage of all parties to the debate. See Jonathan Brown, ‘Scripture in the Modern 
World: the Quran and Hadith’, in Jeffrey T. Kenney and Ebrahim Moosa (eds), 
Islam in the Modern World (London: Routledge, 2014), 13–33, at 29–30.
72. For the translation of tarihselci, I have followed Felix Körner’s rendering. But also, 
as he points out, the ‘English rendering (sic) do not capture the Turkish coinage 
precisely’: Felix Körner, Revisionist Koran Hermeneutics in Contemporary Turkish 
University Theology: Rethinking Islam (Würzburg: Ergon, 2005), 68.
73. This trend was prominent in Turkey during the 1970s and 1980s in particu-
lar (Mustafa Öztürk, ‘Dinî Hükümlerin Kaynağını Kur’an ile Sınırlandırma 
Eğiliminin Kaynakları ve Tutarlılığı’, in Cengiz Kallek (ed.), Dini Hükümlerin 
Kaynağı ve Dini Metinlerin Anlaşılması Konusundaki Çağdaş Yaklaşımlar Çalıştayı 
(İstanbul: İSAM, 2010), 13–67, at 43). The most popular supporter of the dis-
course of ‘Kur’an İslâmı’ (‘Islam derived only from the Qurʾān’) was Yaşar Nuri 
Öztürk (d. 2016) during the latter half of the 1990s. As a kind of spokesperson of 
the reformed Islam supported by the secularists during the 1997 military memo-
randum, he was especially influential outside the academy by means of public 
television programmes. During that period, he was also the Dean of the Faculty 
of Theology at Istanbul University. One of the leading institutions promoting the 
views of the Kur’ancılar today is the Süleymaniye Vakfı, which was established 
by Abdülaziz Bayındır, Professor of Islamic Law at the Faculty of Theology at 
Istanbul University in 1998 (see the foundation’s website at: https://www.suley 
maniyevakfi.org).
74. In Turkey, those who completely reject the Sunnah of the Prophet are figures 

  
Western Hadith Studies in Turkish Academe  
[ 191
outside the academy such as Edip Yüksel. Yüksel, currently residing in the 
United States, describes himself as ‘one of the leading names of the Islamic 
reform movement’, see at: http://19.org/tr/category/edipyuksel/0-edip-yuk 
sel-kimdir, last accessed 22 January 2018. Another example is the anonymous 
group that authored the book Uydurulan Din ve Kur’an’daki Din (‘Fabricated 
Religion vs Religion in the Qurʾān’) (İstanbul: İstanbul Yayınevi, 2016), in 
which they describe legal regulations based on sources other than the Qurʾān as 
fabricated.
75. Öztürk, ‘Dinî Hükümlerin Kaynağını Kur’an’, 45.
76. Öztürk, ‘Dinî Hükümlerin Kaynağını Kur’an’, 152.
77. Özafşar, ‘Hadisin Neliği ve Akademik Hadisçilik’, 149.
78. M. Yaşar Kandemir, Professor of Hadith in the Faculty of Theology at Marmara 
University until his retirement in 1999, is currently working at the Centre for 
Islamic Studies (İSAM). He oversaw all the entries on hadith and wrote a great 
many of them in TDV İslâm Ansiklopedisi (‘Turkey Religious Affairs Foundation 
Encyclopaedia of Islam’) (1983–2016), consisting of forty-four volumes and two 
supplements. Betül Avcı, who studied its entries on Christianity, concludes that 
the encyclopaedia, despite certain shortcomings, tends to let the Christian tradi-
tion speak for itself rather than adopting an Occidentalist approach. See Betül 
Avcı, ‘Contemporary Turkish Research on Christianity: a Critical Study of TDV 
İslam Ansiklopedisi Articles, and Dissertations Conducted between 1988 and 2010 
at the Faculties of Theology at Marmara and Ankara Universities’, PhD thesis, 
Pontifical Gregorian University, 2012, 72. For the online open-access version of 
the encyclopaedia, see at: https://islamansiklopedisi.org.tr.
79. M. Yaşar Kandemir, ‘Sahîhayn’a Yöneltilen Tenkitlerin Değeri’, in İsmail Lütfi 
Çakan (ed.), Sünnetin Dindeki Yeri (İstanbul: Ensar Neşriyat, 1998), 335–76; 
Hatiboğlu, Mehmed Said, ‘Müslüman Âlimlerin Buhârî ve Müslim’e Yönelik 
Eleştirileri’, İslâmî Araştırmalar 10(1–4) (1997): 1–14.
80. M. Hayri Kırbaşoğlu, ‘Hadis İlminde Metodoloji Sorunu’, Sünnetin Dindeki Yeri 
(İstanbul: Ensar Neşriyat, 1998), 427–97.
81. Kırbaşoğlu, ‘Hadis İlminde Metodoloji Sorunu’, 430.
82. Kırbaşoğlu, ‘Hadis İlminde Metodoloji Sorunu’, 432–3.
83. M. Hayri Kırbaşoğlu, ‘Alternatif Hadis Metodolojisi’, in İsmail Kurt and Seyit 
Ali Tüz (eds), İslami İlimlerde Metodoloji/Usul Meselesi (İstanbul: Ensar Neşriyat, 
2005), 777–99, at 779.
84. M. Hayri Kırbaşoğlu, Alternatif Hadis Metodolojisi (Ankara: Kitabiyat, 2002), 
149–50, 343, 354, 359.
85. Bukhārī, Ṣaḥīḥ, īmān 37, bāb suʾāl Jibrīl ilá al-nabī ʿan al-īmān wa-al-islām wa-al-iḥsān 
wa-ʿilm al-sāʿah, No. 50.
86. Kırbaşoğlu, Alternatif Hadis Metodolojisi, 354.
87. Kırbaşoğlu, Alternatif Hadis Metodolojisi, 173.
88. Kırbaşoğlu, Alternatif Hadis Metodolojisi, 173.
89. For example, Kırbaşoğlu holds similar views to those of Hatiboğlu about ‘non-
recited revelation’ and hadiths about the future tribulations (fitan) and Portents 
of the Last Hour (ashrāṭ al-sāʿah). See Alternatif Hadis Metodolojisi, 198, 212–15.

 [ 192 ]
CHAPTER
9
Can Different Questions Yield the 
Same Answers? Islamic and Western 
Scholarship on Shiʿi Narrators in the 
Sunni Tradition
Michael Dann
In the second/eighth and third/ninth centuries, roughly two hundred nar-
rators labelled as Shiʿis were active in the milieux that gave rise to the Sunni 
hadith tradition. Abū ʿAbd al-Raḥmān al-Nasāʾī (d. 303/915), the compiler 
of the last of six hadith collections recognised as canonical by Sunnis, was 
himself associated with Shiʿi sentiments and likely lost his life as a result.1 
These Shiʿi narrators existed along a broad spectrum of theological and 
political orientations, but collectively embodied the high degree of sectarian 
ambiguity that characterised Islam’s early centuries. Some of them played 
an important role in the development of nascent Shiʿi sectarian identities, 
others were best known for their support of Shiʿi-inspired rebellions against 
the Umayyad and ʿAbbāsid dynasties, and yet others were at the forefront of 
the proto-Sunni milieu of the Iraqi garrison city of Kufa. What they shared 
in common was simply their participation in proto-Sunni traditionist circles 
and an association with some iteration of early Shiʿism, a retrospectively 
ironic fact that has rendered them a perennial object of curiosity for subse-
quent generations of Sunni and Shiʿi scholars.
In modern scholarship, these narrators have received the historiographical 
attention of historians working in the Western tradition of Islamic Studies, 
as well as that of Arab, Persian and Turkish scholars writing in a more or 
less confessional fashion. To date, the volume of work produced in non-
Western languages significantly exceeds that of work produced in Western 
languages. This non-Western, or Islamic, scholarship can be further subdi-
vided into works by Imāmī Shiʿis, pro-ʿAlid Sunnis and Sunnis working in 
 confessional academic settings.
In what follows, I offer a summary of the Western scholarship and an 
analysis of the contemporary Islamic scholarship on this topic, focusing 
on the historiographical contributions made by the latter as seen from the 
standpoint of the former. In line with recent developments in the field of 
Qurʾānic studies, I argue that present-day Islamic scholarship undertaken 

  
Can Different Questions Yield the Same Answers?  
[ 193
by both Shiʿis and Sunnis significantly advances our knowledge of the place 
of Shiʿi narrators in the Sunni hadith tradition, even though it is often aimed 
at addressing normative questions of orthodoxy and sectarian boundaries 
foreign to the Western tradition of Islamic Studies.2 I also examine how this 
scholarship is shaped and driven by commitments to particular sectarian 
narratives and an ahistorical, reified view of sectarian categories and bound-
aries. These commitments place limitations on the historiographical contri-
butions of this scholarship, and it is largely for this reason that the work of 
Sunnis and Shiʿis is best viewed in a complementary fashion. For the sake of 
clarity, my discussion is organised in the sections below under four broad 
categories, although there is substantial diversity within each: (1) Western 
Scholarship: State of the Field; (2) Imāmī Cataloguers; (3) Sunni Critics; and 
(4) Sunni Apologists-cum-Historians.
Western Scholarship: State of the Field
The vast majority of Western scholarship on Shiʿi narrators in the Sunni 
tradition has not treated them as a distinct object of inquiry, but rather has 
incorporated them within studies of broader topics. These broader topics 
include chiefly studies of the Sunni and Shiʿi hadith traditions, studies of 
ʿAlid rebellions supported by traditionist scholars, and studies of the evolu-
tion of sectarian identities. Some of these studies focus on individual narra-
tors and others focus more on how Shiʿi narrators have been constituted and 
evaluated as a more general category.
Studies focused on the Sunni hadith tradition have taken the dominant 
Sunni framing of these narrators as a starting point for discussion. This 
framing consists in the question of whether and how one can narrate from 
‘innovators’ (mubtadiʿah), a category subsuming adherents of a variety 
of objectionable theological doctrines, including primarily Shiʿis, Qadarīs 
(advocates of free will), Jabrīs (predestinarians), Khārijīs and individuals 
who believed that the Qurʾān was created. The most detailed study of this 
phenomenon to date is that of Christopher Melchert, who addressed the pres-
ence of ‘innovators’/‘sectaries’ in the pre-canonical hadith milieu through 
a statistical survey of Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī’s (d. 852/1449) biographical 
dictionary of narrators, Taqrīb al-Tahdhīb. Melchert noted the relative preva-
lence of these trends in the period spanning roughly from the early second/
eighth century to the mid-third/ninth century and identified a total of ninety 
Shiʿis (seventy labelled as Shiʿis and twenty with the more derogatory term 
Rāfiḍīs), making them the most prominent sectarian trend in the traditionist 
milieux of this period. He notes that the presence of Shiʿis and other sectaries 
declined rapidly around the middle of the third/ninth century, and attrib-
utes this decline to the disappearance of some of these trends, their partial 
absorption within other schools (including Sunnism and Muʿtazilism), and 
especially to the ‘closing of ranks’ among Sunni  traditionalists in response to 
al-Maʾmūn’s (r. 198–218/813–33) inquisition.3

 194 ] 
Michael Dann
Melchert’s article offers preliminary answers concerning the prevalence of 
‘innovators’/‘sectaries’ in the proto-Sunni traditionist milieu that gave rise 
to the Six Books, but does not address the question of how these figures were 
evaluated by hadith critics. On this point, several studies on the develop-
ment of Sunni hadith criticism concur that, as a rule, hadith critics did not 
reject narrators solely on the basis of their association with innovation or a 
sectarian trend.4 This is hardly surprising given that the most authoritative 
voices in the genre of hadith sciences left little doubt that the early hadith 
compilers had narrated extensively from innovators. These same authorities, 
however, suggested that accepting the narrations of innovators should be 
subject to one of two conditions. Some argued that, although the narrations 
of innovators could be accepted in general, the narrations of proselytising 
(duʿāh) innovators should be rejected. Others argued that the narrations of 
innovators could be accepted as long as they did not support the particular 
innovation that they espoused.5
To date, there has been no systematic study of how early hadith  compilers 
approached this issue in practice, although two scholars have offered brief 
suggestive comments. Jonathan Brown has noted that even Muslim ibn 
al-Ḥajjāj (d. 261/875) narrated a hadith on the virtues of ʿAlī from a well-
known Shiʿi, contravening the theoretical prohibition against narrating 
hadiths from innovators that support their doctrines.6 Ghassan Abdul-Jabbar 
provides a different emphasis when he notes that if al-Bukhārī (d. 256/870) 
quotes a hadith from someone with unorthodox views, ‘he does so with 
care’ – a pregnant statement on which Abdul-Jabbar unfortunately does not 
elaborate any further.7
Aside from studying Shiʿi narrators under the rubric of the problematic of 
narrating from innovators, it is also worth noting that Western scholarship on 
the Sunni hadith tradition has also adopted the taxonomies of early Shiʿism 
provided by the tradition itself. Scholars like al-Dhahabī (d. 748/1348) and 
Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī located Shiʿi narrators on a terminological spectrum 
defined by terms like tashayyuʿ, rafḍ and ghulūw primarily on the basis of 
their attitudes towards the Companions, and Western scholars have cited 
their discussions for the purposes of providing a shorthand definition of the 
Shiʿism of hadith narrators.8
Just as Western scholarship on the Sunni hadith tradition has framed 
Shiʿi narrators largely according to the perspectives supplied by the Sunni 
hadith tradition itself, Western scholarship on Imāmī hadith literature also 
reflects the concerns of that tradition. The bio-bibliographical genre has long 
been a strength of Imāmī hadith scholarship, and has served as one basis 
for substantiating claims to the authenticity of narrations from the Imāms. 
Hossein Modarressi’s seminal study of early Shiʿi literature comes in this 
genre and provides biographical entries for a large number of narrators 
who were active in both Sunni and Shiʿi milieux, along with references to 
narrations that presumably stem from their non-extant written collections 
in a wide array of later Imāmī, Zaydī and Sunni sources.9 In two separate 

  
Can Different Questions Yield the Same Answers?  
[ 195
studies, Liyakat Takim analyses the evolution of the biographical profiles 
of prominent Imāmī narrators in both Sunni and Imāmī sources, revealing 
overlapping but distinctive perspectives on the doctrines they adhered to.10
Within studies of Zaydī Shiʿism, a greater focus has naturally been 
accorded to the political and military activities of Shiʿi traditionists. In a 
monograph on the emergence of the Zaydī Imāmate in Yemen, Cornelis 
van Arendonk compiled an extensive list of jurists and traditionists who 
supported early ʿAlid rebellions, many of whom were Shiʿis of one stripe or 
another.11 The extent of, and reasons for, traditionist support of these rebel-
lions has also been addressed by scholars such as Amikam Elad and Maher 
Jarrar.12 One of the regrettable features of modern Islamic scholarship on 
Shiʿi narrators in the Sunni tradition is the relative lack of Zaydī representa-
tion, which leads to significant blind spots as discussed in more detail in the 
Conclusion.
Perhaps the most penetrating Western scholarship on these narrators is 
found in studies that have sought to locate particular narrators along the 
spectrum of early Shiʿi affiliations in the period in which intra-Shiʿi bounda-
ries were emerging but not yet completely drawn. This effort entails embed-
ding these narrators within their socio-political contexts and adopting a 
more holistic perspective that draws on the literature of Imāmīs, Zaydīs and 
Sunnis alike. Maher Jarrar provides a comprehensive profile of Ibrāhīm ibn 
Abī Yaḥyá (d. 184/800–1?), a prominent but controversial Medinan scholar 
who straddled several nascent sectarian communities.13 The works of Najam 
Haider and Josef van Ess stand out in this regard. Haider has argued that 
one of the primary lines demarcating different groups of Shiʿis from one 
another, and determining the extent to which they were accepted among 
Sunnis in spite of pro-Shiʿi theological and political inclinations, was adher-
ence to characteristically proto-Sunni positions in matters of ritual law that 
became sectarian shibboleths.14 In his monumental survey of theological 
trends in the early Muslim community, van Ess provides comprehensive 
profiles of several Shiʿi narrators, drawing on heresiographical, biographi-
cal, historical and hadith literature. The narrators included in his survey are 
predominantly those mentioned in the heresiographical work of Pseudo-al-
Nāshiʾ al-Akbar (d. 293/905–6), which provides the organising principle of 
van Ess’s survey.15 In keeping with his method in Theologie und Gesellschaft, 
he lets the profiles of these figures speak for themselves to a large extent, in 
the process providing a representative sample of the range of doctrines and 
political positions promoted by Shiʿi narrators.16
Although collectively the Western scholarship surveyed here covers sig-
nificant ground in the study of Shiʿi narrators active in proto-Sunni milieux, 
it also raises many questions for further study. Answers to some of these 
questions can be found in, or at least suggested by, recent Islamic  scholarship 
on the topic. I restrict myself here to advancing those questions that I believe 
this scholarship is most useful in answering: (1) what was the extent of 
Shiʿi narrators’ participation in proto-Sunni traditionist milieux?; (2) did 

 196 ] 
Michael Dann
the taxonomies of Shiʿism created by medieval Sunni authors accurately 
reflect the spectrum of Shiʿi doctrines and affiliations in these milieux?; and 
(3) to what extent did the theoretical positions on narrating from innova-
tors adopted in the Sunni science of hadith accord with the practices of the 
 compilers of hadith collections themselves?
Imāmī Cataloguers
The largest volume of modern Islamic scholarship on Shiʿi narrators in the 
Sunni hadith tradition has been produced by Imāmī Shiʿis. The contributions 
of Imāmī scholars have come primarily in the way of identifying Shiʿi nar-
rators and collating relevant biographical and bibliographical material on 
them. The interest of modern Imāmī scholars in Shiʿi narrators stems largely 
from their utility in polemical debates on various points of perennial Sunni–
Shiʿi conflict. In the presentation of Imāmī authors, the widespread presence 
of Shiʿi narrators in Sunni works can serve to refute Sunni charges against 
Shiʿism, demonstrate systematic Sunni bias against Shiʿis, and/or substanti-
ate Shiʿi doctrines on the basis of Sunni sources. Alternatively, in literature 
framed in a more ecumenical fashion, their presence may be construed as 
signifying an early social overlap between Sunnis and Shiʿis, although this 
point is emphasised less frequently than the others.
The first modern Imāmī compilation of Shiʿi narrators in the Sunni tradi-
tion was undertaken by the Lebanese scholar ʿAbd al-Ḥusayn Sharaf al-Dīn 
al-Mūsawī (d. 1957), whose work has been paradigmatic for later authors 
writing on the subject. Al-Mūsawī’s compilation occurs in the course of 
a highly contrived correspondence that purportedly took place between 
himself and the late Shaykh al-Azhar Salīm al-Bishrī (d. 1916) in 1911. 
According to al-Mūsawī, the original copies of their letters were destroyed. 
Al-Mūsawī’s reconstruction of the exchange, which he states includes 
revisions and additions, was published in 1934, nearly two decades after 
al-Bishrī’s death. In the published version of the correspondence, al-Mūsawī 
leads his curiously pliant interlocutor to the threshold of conversion to 
Imāmism step by step, providing him with the evidence for Imāmī claims 
from his own sources and leaving him to arrive at his own conclusions in 
an adulatory process of connect-the-dots.17 Early in the exchange, al-Bishrī 
expresses a nebulous doubt regarding the historical reliability of Shiʿi trans-
missions, which provides al-Mūsawī with the occasion to compile biographi-
cal entries on 100 Shiʿi narrators from Sunni sources in an overwhelming 
display of the fact that Sunnis themselves relied on Shiʿi narrators and trans-
missions.18 The logical conclusion to be drawn from the impressive array of 
information is left for al-Bishrī to state in rhyming prose:
There is nothing left to prevent the Sunnī from using [the narration of] his Shīʿī 
brother as proof if he is reliable. Your opinion in this [matter] is the clear truth 
and the opinion of those who object is obstinacy and quarrelsomeness. Their 

  
Can Different Questions Yield the Same Answers?  
[ 197
statements regarding the invalidity of using [the narrations of] Shīʿīs as proof 
oppose their actions, and their actions on the occasion of presenting evidence 
contradict their statements . . . In such a short period you presented something 
fit to be dedicated for a monograph. I have named it for you – The Reliable 
Narrators among the Shīʿah in Sunnī Chains of Narration (Asnād al-shīʿah fī isnād 
al-sunnah) – and it will be the pinnacle in this subject, beyond which there is no 
path for a seeker, nor any route for an aspirant.19
Al-Mūsawī never compiled the suggested monograph, but the task was 
eventually undertaken more than half a century later by Muḥammad Jaʿfar 
al-Ṭabasī, a professor at the Qum ḥawzah, under the slightly modified title 
Shīʿī Narrators in Sunnī Chains of Narration (Rijāl al-shīʿah fī asānīd al-sunnah). 
In this work, al-Ṭabasī compiled more thorough biographical entries on 143 
Shiʿi narrators, drawing on a wider range of Sunni sources. In addition to 
compiling basic biographical data on these narrators, documenting their 
association with Shiʿism in Sunni sources, and noting their presence in the 
Six Books, al-Ṭabasī also provides notations on any association these narra-
tors may have had with the Twelve Imāms on the basis of Imāmī biographi-
cal sources.20 The body of this work is not analytical, but it is framed by an 
introduction intended to guide the reader’s interpretation of the data found 
throughout the compilation. On the one hand, al-Ṭabasī states that the com-
pilation vitiates the Sunni charge that Shiʿis did not play a significant role in 
the narration and compilation of hadith. On the other hand, the compilation 
demonstrates a deeply entrenched Sunni bias against Shiʿi narrators:
It is as if trustworthiness and Shīʿism were two things that cannot be conjoined 
in a Muslim narrator, or weakness and the absence of trustworthiness are two 
things inherent to every Shīʿī narrator! You will also see that the main condition 
for accepting a narration is that its narrator not be a Shīʿī …21
The basic thesis of al-Ṭabasī is repeated in a more overtly polemical work on 
the evolution of hadith scholarship among Sunnis and Shiʿis by al-Sayyid 
Muḥammad ʿAlī al-Ḥilw, a scholar at the ḥawzah of Najaf. Drawing on 
established Imāmī interpretations of the events surrounding the succession 
to Muḥammad, al-Ḥilw presents Sunni hadith scholarship as a continuous 
conspiratorial effort, stretching from events at the end of Muḥammad’s 
life through the Umayyad and ʿAbbāsid periods and beyond, to suppress 
the knowledge of Muḥammad’s explicit designation of ʿAlī as his succes-
sor. He devotes a considerable portion of his discussion to cataloguing 
Shiʿi narrators, with special attention given to those who were rejected by 
Sunnis specifically because they narrated objectionable reports on ʿAlī’s 
virtues.22 Rejection on such grounds, for al-Ḥilw, serves as evidence that 
Sunni methods of narrator criticism were constructed around the aim of 
tendentiously just ifying the events that marginalised ʿAlī during the early 
contestations over the succession to Muḥammad. He catalogues forty-seven 

 198 ] 
Michael Dann
such narrators as representative examples amid a fairly wide-ranging discus-
sion. Although there is overlap between his list and those of al-Mūsawī and 
al-Ṭabasī, many of the narrators were not identified by either author.
The inclusion of such a compilation in a work otherwise dedicated to more 
standard items of Sunni–Shiʿi polemic is an indication of the salience that this 
topic has gained in contemporary Imāmī polemics and apologetics. A brief 
and seemingly random list of Shiʿi narrators in the Sunni tradition is found 
in one of the most widely read introductory works on Shiʿism, Muḥammad 
al-Ḥusayn Āl Kāshif al-Ghiṭāʾ’s Aṣl al-Shīʿah wa-uṣūluhā.23 Defending the 
authenticity of narrations from Shiʿis in Sunni works is also a major recurring 
theme in the works of Ayatollah ʿAlī al-Ḥusaynī al-Mīlānī.24
While al-Mūsawī’s cataloguing project has typically been extended in 
polemical and apologetic directions, one group of Imāmī scholars has chosen 
to frame the phenomenon of Shiʿi narrators in the Sunni tradition in a rela-
tively more ecumenical fashion. In 1995, the chief organisation for Sunni–Shiʿi 
ecumenism in Iran, the Global Assembly for Rapprochement between Islamic 
Schools, held a conference around the theme of narrators found in both Sunni 
and Shiʿi corpora of hadith, not all of whom were necessarily Shiʿis. The 
presentations at the conference were then compiled, edited and harmonised 
by a team of Iranian scholars into the form of a multi-volume compendium 
published in 2001. The work lists 1,092 narrators shared by Sunnis and Shiʿis 
and provides biographical entries on 274 of the most prominent figures.25 
The compilers shared at least one goal with al-Mūsawī, namely, proving that 
Shiʿis played a prominent role in preserving the Prophetic Sunnah, a phe-
nomenon that they believe has received insufficient attention among Sunnis. 
Unlike al-Ṭabasī and al-Ḥilw, however, the authors do not construe the com-
pilation as evidence of Sunni bias against Shiʿis.26
In assessing these works from the standpoint of Western scholarship, we 
can state that in terms of compilation, they constitute a valuable achieve-
ment. They exceed the most comprehensive Western survey of Shiʿi narra-
tors by more than 50 per cent. The biographical material that they include 
from Imāmī sources, even if it is limited, is also a helpful initial step in pro-
viding a more well-rounded view of these figures. Although these Imāmī 
works stand in the genre of compendia and include very little analysis, the 
authors do frame their works with introductory remarks intended to guide 
the reader’s interpretation of the compiled biographical data. These intro-
ductory remarks all engage in a significant conflation by using the vague, 
diffuse sentiment of tashayyuʿ identified by Sunni biographers to make 
implicit historical arguments about the much more specific phenomenon 
of Imāmism. Al-Ṭabasī does make a distinction between Imāmism and a 
more general form of Shiʿism, but the implications of this distinction are not 
applied analytically. The majority of early Shiʿis who contributed to trans-
mitting Sunni hadith, and especially those who played a more prominent 
role, had only limited connections to the nascent Imāmī community in the 
second/eighth and third/ninth centuries.

  
Can Different Questions Yield the Same Answers?  
[ 199
The majority of Imāmīs, in turn, viewed the nature of many of these nar-
rators’ attachments to the Prophet’s family as severely misguided. Friction 
between the nascent Imāmī and Zaydī communities of mid-second-/eighth-
century Kufa was a defining feature of the city’s Shiʿi milieu. It is, perhaps, 
for this reason that most Imāmīs draw only sparingly on Imāmī biographical 
literature in the works surveyed above; a more detailed engagement with this 
literature would reveal that Imāmīs vigorously rejected many of the Shiʿi nar-
rators found in the Sunni tradition. It is only the work of the Global Assembly 
scholars that engages with Imāmī literature in a substantive fashion and 
includes anecdotes that portray non-Imāmī narrators in a negative light. 
These anecdotes, however, are frequently omitted from the Arabic translation 
of their work.27 In spite of these shortcomings, this body of scholarship is suc-
cessful in bringing to light a portion of the genealogy of Sunni tradition that, 
left to their own devices, Sunni scholars have tended to downplay or ignore.
Sunni Critics
An exception to this tendency within Sunni scholarship is found in the 
works of Muḥammad ibn ʿAqīl al-ʿAlawī (d. 1931) and Aḥmad ibn Ṣiddīq 
al-Ghumārī (d. 1961), two traditional Sunni scholars who were highly critical 
of the Sunni reception of Shiʿi narrators. Ibn ʿAqīl was a Ḥaḍramī sayyid who 
wore many hats, including those of an itinerant merchant, a founder of reli-
gious institutions and periodicals in southeast Asia, and a religious scholar 
with ties to the reformist circle of Rashīd Riḍā (d. 1935) and Shiʿi scholars 
associated with the ecumenical taqrīb trend.28 He was best known for contro-
versial works in which he denounced Muʿāwiyah and the Umayyads,29 but 
also penned an entire monograph on Shiʿi narrators in 1924, under the title 
al-ʿAtb al-jamīl ʿalá ahl al-jarḥ wa-al-taʿdīl (‘A Gentle Reproof of the People of 
Narrator Criticism’). Ibn ʿAqīl argued that the collective weight of the Sunni 
hadith tradition displayed an entrenched bias against early Shiʿis, ʿAlī and 
ahl al-bayt, which he believed stood in marked contrast to the Sunni tradi-
tion’s relatively favourable treatment of figures associated with anti-ʿAlid 
trends, such as Khārijīs, Nāṣibīs and figures associated with the Umayyad 
dynasty.30
In general, Ibn ʿAqīl treats the Sunni hadith tradition as an undifferenti-
ated whole, but it is represented for him above all by the two towering 
figures of Mamlūk-era hadith scholarship, Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī and Shams 
al-Dīn al-Dhahabī, in whose hands the Sunni hadith tradition is generally 
considered to have reached its apogee. The first target of his critique in this 
work is Ibn Ḥajar, who had also noticed an imbalance in the treatment of 
pro- and anti-ʿAlid figures who fell afoul of later formulations of orthodoxy, 
but sought to justify and explain this imbalance rather than exploit it. Part of 
Ibn Ḥajar’s effort was to offer precise definitions of the key terms used to des-
ignate early Shiʿi narrators, including tashayyuʿ, shīʿī, rafḍ and ghulūw. These 
definitions exhibited a tendency to domesticate the phenomenon of Shiʿism 

 200 ] 
Michael Dann
in the early hadith milieu within the framework of a Sunni historical outlook. 
In the introduction to his commentary on Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī, Ibn Ḥajar offered 
the following taxonomy of Shiʿism:
Shīʿism is the love of ʿAlī and preferring him over the Companions. Whoever 
gives him precedence over Abū Bakr and ʿUmar is considered extreme in his 
Shīʿism (ghālin fī tashayyuʿihi) and is referred to as a rāfiḍī. Otherwise he is simply 
a Shīʿī.31
Ibn ʿAqīl argues that if this definition is accepted, many of the most promi-
nent figures of Islam’s first three generations must be considered rāfiḍīs, 
which would be a ‘back-breaking’ conclusion. He lists a large number of 
Companions whom he believes to have held this position, arguing that it 
would be absurd to consider them rāfiḍīs.32
In a work on weak narrators, Ibn Ḥajar offered another definition of 
extreme Shiʿism that focused more on the question of denouncing ʿAlī’s 
opponents than on the issue of relative preference among the caliphs:
The extreme Shīʿī at the time of the predecessors (salaf) and in their customary 
usage [of the term] is one who speaks [ill] of ʿUthmān, Ṭalḥah, al-Zubayr, and 
a group of those who fought against ʿAlī, may God be pleased with him, 
and reviled him (taʿarraḍa li-sabbihi). And the extreme one (al-ghālī) in our time 
and in our customary usage is the one who anathematises these great men and 
disavows the two Shaykhs [Abū Bakr and ʿUmar] as well. Such [a person] is 
astray, a slanderer.33
Ibn ʿAqīl notes that this definition is ambiguous, for many people fought 
against ʿAlī. Does Ibn Ḥajar mean to imply that speaking ill of any of them 
renders one an extreme Shiʿi, or only some of them? If Muʿāwiyah is included 
here, then many prominent Companions, such as ʿAlī’s sons and ʿAmmār 
ibn Yāsir, had, in fact, cursed him. Are they extreme Shiʿis? Furthermore, the 
subject of the verb and the referent of the pronoun in the phrase ‘taʿarraḍa li-
sabbihi’ are unclear. Does the phrase mean that speaking ill of those who fought 
against and reviled ʿAlī renders one an extreme Shiʿi? Or does it mean that 
speaking ill of one whom ʿAlī himself reviled renders one an extreme Shiʿi?34
These terminological questions set the stage for Ibn ʿAqīl’s historical 
argument. The first example that he gives of a Shiʿi narrator is Miṣdaʿ 
al-Muʿarqab, who earned his epithet when an Umayyad governor cut his 
Achilles tendons because of his refusal to engage in the Umayyad ritual prac-
tice of reviling ʿAlī. Refusing to curse ʿAlī, for Ibn ʿAqīl, is the sort of Shiʿism 
that has long been condemned by the Sunni hadith tradition and has been 
used an excuse for dismissing pro-ʿAlid and anti-Umayyad reports, all of 
which results in a profound distortion in the standard Sunni vision of early 
Islamic history.35 The rest of the work consists of a refutation of Ibn Ḥajar’s 
attempts to explain the imbalance in the treatment of pro- and anti-ʿAlid 

  
Can Different Questions Yield the Same Answers?  
[ 201
narrators, followed by an extensive juxtaposition of examples of anti-ʿAlid 
narrators who were accepted by Sunni hadith critics with pro-ʿAlid narrators 
who were criticised.36
The critique of Ibn ʿAqīl is echoed to a large extent by Aḥmad ibn 
Ṣiddīq al-Ghumārī, a Moroccan sharīf and Sufi shaykh who was one of the 
most accomplished and prolific hadith scholars of the twentieth century.37 
Al-Ghumārī dedicated an entire work to defending the authenticity of the 
hadith, ‘I am the city of knowledge and ʿAlī is its gate’, which was narrated 
by Abū al-Ṣalt ʿAbd al-Salām ibn Ṣāliḥ al-Harawī (d. 236/851), a controver-
sial narrator in Sunni circles and a major source for Imāmī reports from ʿAlī 
al-Riḍā.38 Sunni hadith critics who questioned al-Harawī’s reliability did so 
in part because he narrated uncorroborated (munkar) hadiths, and in part 
because of his Shiʿism.
Much like Ibn ʿAqīl, a significant portion of al-Ghumārī’s discussion 
revolves around substantiating a charge of widespread anti-ʿAlid bias in the 
Sunni hadith tradition, but in addition to this he adds an extensive discus-
sion aimed at dismantling the standard Sunni doctrines on narrating from 
innovators. To begin with, he notes that narration from innovators was ubiq-
uitous, even among figures who were theoretically opposed to the practice. 
He asserts that al-Bukhārī narrated from more than seventy Shiʿis and that 
Muslim narrated from an even greater number in his Ṣaḥīḥ.39
More specifically, al-Ghumārī argues vigorously against the two primary 
theoretical restrictions on narrating from innovators: that they cannot be 
accepted if they are proselytisers, or that those of their narrations that lend 
support to their particular innovation cannot be accepted. With respect to the 
first restriction, al-Ghumārī argues that the distinction between  proselytisers 
and non-proselytisers is largely arbitrary, since anyone who publicises a 
doctrine can be considered a proselytiser, and this must include nearly 
everyone known to be an innovator.40 With respect to the second restriction, 
he notes that innovation is a relative category determined by perspective. 
Sunnis are internally divided, and nearly everyone is guilty of innovation 
from someone else’s perspective. If no one can narrate hadiths in favour 
of the school to which they adhere, then no one can narrate hadiths at all.41 
Furthermore, according to al-Ghumārī, although this restriction was intro-
duced against the generic category of innovators, its true target was limiting 
the scope of acceptable pro-ʿAlid narrations from Shiʿis. The first scholar to 
articulate such a restriction, Ibrāhīm ibn Yaʿqūb al-Jūzajānī (d. c. 256/870), 
was a notorious anti-Shiʿi. The only considerations that should be taken 
into account when assessing a narrator’s reliability are in fact honesty and 
accuracy. Considerations of doctrine and sectarian affiliation are largely 
irrelevant.42
It is noteworthy that both al-Ghumārī and Ibn ʿAqīl weave certain Zaydī 
authorities who engaged Sunni thought into their works. For al-Ghumārī, 
some of the strongest historical support for the idea of ignoring sectar-
ian affiliations in assessing narrators comes from Ibn al-Amīr al-Ṣanʿānī 

 202 ] 
Michael Dann
(d. 1182/1768), a prominent Zaydī scholar who effectively adopted a tradi-
tionalist, hadith-based Sunni methodology in theology and law.43 In another 
work, al-Ghumārī cites with approval the claim of the tenth-century ency-
clopaedist Ibn al-Nadīm (d. c. 380/990) that ‘most of the hadith scholars’ 
were Zaydīs.44 Ibn ʿAqīl includes several citations of works by a seventeenth-
century Zaydī scholar, Ṣāliḥ ibn Mahdī al-Maqbalī (d. 1108/1696), who also 
engaged Sunni thought extensively but was somewhat more critical of it 
than Ibn al-Amīr al-Ṣanʿānī.45 Al-Maqbalī directed particular attention to 
Sunni bias against Shiʿi narrators in a manner similar to but less systematic 
than Ibn ʿAqīl and al-Ghumārī. It is possible that Ibn ʿAqīl’s critique of the 
Sunni reception of Shiʿi narrators in fact had its origins in the considerable 
body of Zaydī work on the subject, although he implies in the introduction to 
al-ʿAtb al-jamīl that he came to his conclusions through independent research. 
In any case, the affinity between modern pro-ʿAlid Sunnis and ‘Sunnising’ 
Zaydīs of the early modern period is noteworthy, and this is one of the few 
instances in which Zaydīs are admitted into the modern conversation on 
Shiʿi  narrators in the Sunni tradition.
In terms of their historiographical contributions, the aims of Ibn ʿAqīl 
and al-Ghumārī are transparently polemical, but their work does alert us 
to certain biases and key historical turning points in the Sunni hadith tradi-
tion. In order to argue convincingly that a millennium of tradition had been 
misguided, these authors had to identify the points at which things had 
gone wrong, or, in other words, offer a deconstructive genealogy of tradi-
tion before providing it with a new pedigree. Ibn ʿAqīl alerts us to the biases 
inherent in the taxonomies of Shiʿism provided by Mamlūk-era hadith schol-
ars, which became standard reference points for Sunnis, and al-Ghumārī 
alerts us to the malleable and somewhat arbitrary nature of the discourses on 
narrating from innovators. Collectively, the efforts of both authors to resur-
rect the pro-ʿAlid portion of early Sunni traditionalism shed new light on an 
otherwise ignored corner of the Sunni past.
Sunni Apologists-cum-Historians
The critiques of the Sunni reception of Shiʿi narrators surveyed above, from 
both Imāmī and pro-ʿAlid Sunni scholars, have given rise to a strand of 
recent Sunni scholarship that has sought to either elucidate or justify the tra-
ditional Sunni approach to the issue. This scholarship consists of an admix-
ture of apologetic, traditional and historiographical tendencies. Nearly all of 
it has been undertaken by scholars associated with confessional institutions 
of higher learning, whose intellectual production is often markedly different 
from that of more traditional ulema. For these scholars, tradition is conceived 
of less as a dynamic, trans-temporal conversation in which they are simply 
the latest participants and more as a static object of inquiry, rendering the his-
toriographical questions that it seeks to address somewhat closer to those of 
Western scholarship. Nonetheless, the break with tradition signified by this 

  
Can Different Questions Yield the Same Answers?  
[ 203
style of scholarship is by no means absolute. Formally speaking, it retains 
significant links to tradition, such as foregrounding discussions of various 
topics with lexical and technical definitions of key terms, even as it incorpo-
rates hallmark characteristics of Western scholarship, such as the literature 
review. Most importantly, the types of historiographical questions pursued 
in this scholarship and the answers it provides leave little doubt that tradi-
tion is still valued as the historical embodiment of continual divine guidance, 
and inquiry into it remains aimed more at justification and elucidation than 
critique.46 These general observations concerning the relationship of apolo-
getics, tradition and history hold true for the scholarship examined here in 
varying proportions.
The most explicitly apologetic work by a present-day Sunni on Shiʿi nar-
rators is that of al-Sharīf Ḥātim al-ʿAwnī, a scholar of some standing in 
moderate Salafi circles who is a former professor at Umm al-Qurá University 
in Jeddah and a prolific author and editor of works on hadith. In a work 
titled ʿAqlānīyat manhaj al-muḥaddithīn fī al-tathabbut min ʿadālat al-ruwāh 
(‘The Rationality of the Hadith Scholars’ Method of Verifying the Probity of 
Narrators’), al-ʿAwnī devotes about one-third of his discussion to the ques-
tion of narrating from innovators, with particular attention given to Shiʿis 
and Nāṣibīs. The overall thrust of his argument is to demonstrate that, in 
contrast to the assertions of scholars like al-Mūsawī and especially Ibn ʿAqīl 
– the primary targets of al-ʿAwnī’s critique – Sunni hadith scholars were both 
even-handed in their treatment of pro- and anti-ʿAlid figures, and generally 
tolerant of differences of opinion that did not lead to deliberate fabrication.47 
He notes, for example, that Sunni scholars not only accepted the narrations 
of Shiʿis but cited their opinions regarding narrator criticism, as was the case 
with scholars like ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Khirāsh al-Marwazī (d. 283/896). At 
the same time, scholars like Ibn Ḥajar recognised that the opinions of anti-
ʿAlid critics like Ibrāhīm ibn Yaʿqūb al-Jūzajānī on Shiʿi narrators were too 
biased to be accepted at face value.48
Al-ʿAwnī also argues in favour of the dominant Sunni positions on nar-
rating from innovators, namely, that it is acceptable to narrate from them as 
long as they are not proselytisers and their narrations do not support their 
particular variety of bidʿah. These positions, for al-ʿAwnī, are emblematic of 
the utmost tolerance, objectivity, impartiality and fairness – all terms that he 
employs frequently to characterise Sunni hadith critics throughout his dis-
cussion. If an innovator is a proselytiser, he is more liable to misinterpret the 
meaning of a hadith, twist its wording unintentionally, or hide its technical 
blemishes through obfuscation (tadlīs).49 Likewise, an innovator might unin-
tentionally pass on an unreliable hadith due to his strong desire to support 
his convictions. Even a good Sunni might fall into this trap, but hadith critics 
successfully weeded out such anomalous cases. Rejecting the uncorrobo-
rated hadiths of innovators is therefore perfectly logical and is paralleled by 
sound judicial practice, where testimonies of interested witnesses must be 
rejected under some circumstances.50

 204 ] 
Michael Dann
Although the aims of al-ʿAwnī’s work are unequivocally apologetic, he 
offers a useful corrective to the bodies of scholarship outlined above, which 
tend to portray the Sunni hadith tradition as monolithic in its treatment of 
pro- and anti-ʿAlid figures and ignore evidence that is not supportive of their 
critiques. While al-ʿAwnī’s work was framed primarily in apologetic terms 
and only addresses historiographic questions incidentally, studies by other 
modern Sunni scholars invert this relationship. Karīmah Sūdānī wrote a 
dissertation at Algeria University on al-Bukhārī’s method of narrating from 
Shiʿis in his Ṣaḥīḥ, which was subsequently published as a monograph in 
Riyadh. The work consists of three parts: (1) a discussion of the theoretical 
problem of narrating from innovators as framed in works on ʿulūm al-ḥadīth; 
(2) short biographical entries on Shiʿi narrators in al-Bukhārī’s Ṣaḥīḥ and an 
evaluation of the extent of their Shiʿism; and (3) a survey of their narrations in 
the Ṣaḥīḥ. The first part of the work largely consists of a review of the various 
theoretical positions on narrating from innovators articulated in Sunni litera-
ture.51 The second part analyses thirty of al-Bukhārī’s narrators accused of 
Shiʿism. It is here that the apologetic tendencies of the work are most appar-
ent. In the case of certain highly prominent narrators, such as ʿAbd al-Razzāq 
al-Ṣanʿānī (d. 211/827) and Khālid ibn Makhlad al-Qazwīnī (d. 213/828–9?), 
Sūdānī minimises the significance of their Shiʿism and ignores altogether the 
substantial body of anecdotes indicating that they were critical of some of 
the Companions.52 In the case of other prominent narrators associated with 
Shiʿism, such as al-Aʿmash (d. 148/765) and Manṣūr ibn al-Muʿtamir (d. 
132/750?), Sūdānī does not even consider the possibility that they may have 
been Shiʿis.53 The overall result of such distortions is that she significantly 
understates both the presence of Shiʿi narrators in al-Bukhārī’s work and the 
extent of their dissonance with later Sunni orthodoxy.
The third part of Sūdānī’s work is the most historiographically valu-
able and persuasive. Her unique contribution lies in her detailed analysis 
al-Bukhārī’s narrations from the thirty Shiʿis included in her study, which 
includes hundreds of hadiths and is comprehensive enough to shed signifi-
cant light on al-Bukhārī’s method in narrating from Shiʿis. Sūdānī concludes 
that al-Bukhārī rarely narrated hadiths that could be construed as support-
ing Shiʿi doctrines from Shiʿis themselves, and even where he did, they were 
generally corroborated by narrations from non-Shiʿis.54 Sūdānī’s work is the 
only comprehensive study of how a particular compiler approached this 
issue in practice that I am aware of to date, and it strongly suggests that while 
al-Bukhārī narrated from Shiʿis extensively, he adopted a highly conserva-
tive approach to narrating hadiths related to points of Sunni–Shiʿi dispute 
from them. It also suggests that the retrospectively formulated guidelines 
found in manuals of ʿulūm al-ḥadīth were not entirely divorced from practice, 
even if the choices of individual authors cannot ultimately be reduced to 
formulaic rules.
Some scholars have attempted to close this theoretical loophole by intro-
ducing further subtle distinctions into the question of hadiths that support 

  
Can Different Questions Yield the Same Answers?  
[ 205
innovation. In an article analysing this sort of hadith in the Ṣaḥīḥayn, the 
Jordanian Sunni Jamāl Abū Zāyid attempts to exonerate al-Bukhārī and 
Muslim from the charge of including these hadiths in their works. In general, 
Abū Zāyid finds that such narrations from Shiʿis are corroborated by paral-
lel narrations from non-Shiʿis. For the few cases where such corroboration 
is lacking, Abū Zāyid introduces a novel distinction in an attempt to bring 
the Ṣaḥīḥayn fully in line with the theoretical standards of Sunni hadith sci-
ences: an innovated school of thought such as Shiʿism contains elements 
that agree with Sunni doctrine and other elements that are truly innovated. 
The appearance of ‘supporting innovation’ can thus be chimerical. Hadith 
critics like al-Bukhārī and Muslim would accept only those narrations that 
supported the non-innovated portion of an innovated school.55 Al-Sharīf 
Ḥātim al-ʿAwnī likewise argued that certain hadiths only appear to support 
innovation, but in reality are perfectly consonant with Sunni doctrine.56 This 
strained parsing of the concept of innovation suggests an important point. 
Abū Zāyid and al-ʿAwnī treat the distinction between non-innovated and 
innovated doctrines as self-evident (or at least apodictically determined by 
the choices of authorities like al-Bukhārī and Muslim), but this serves only to 
highlight the ambiguous and contested nature of innovation itself.
This same point is evident in the work of a Turkish scholar, Muhammad 
Enes Topgül, whose Master’s thesis on Shiʿi narrators in the Sunni tradition 
is likely the most comprehensive study on the topic in any language to date 
and is more deeply engaged with Western scholarship than any of the works 
surveyed thus far. This study is unfortunately unpublished and written 
in a language not commonly employed by scholars focused on hadith in 
Western or Islamic contexts. Like Sūdānī, Topgül approaches the topic 
largely through the lens of Sunni hadith criticism and includes an extensive 
survey of the various Sunni doctrines on narrating from innovators.57 He also 
includes a comprehensive survey of the various labels and terms applied to 
Shiʿi narrators. Here he makes the important observation that key terms of 
sectarian designation, such as shiʿi, tashayyuʿ and rāfiḍī were employed with 
a high degree of elasticity during the formative period of the hadith tradition 
and beyond.58 These insights are fleshed out in a subsequent article, where 
Topgül demonstrates how geographic and chronological factors led certain 
hadith critics to accentuate their descriptions of the Shiʿism of Kufan nar-
rators. Hadith critics from Basra and Syria had a tendency to describe the 
Shiʿism of Kufans in relatively harsh terms and later hadith critics, such as 
Ibn Ḥibbān (d. 354/965), had a greater propensity to describe narrators as 
rāfiḍīs than their third-/ninth-century counterparts.59
The bulk of Topgül’s study is prosopographical, consisting of brief bio-
graphical entries on 201 Shiʿi narrators. Topgül’s study thus surpasses the 
compilation of any single Imāmī cataloguer surveyed above, although he 
builds on the works of both al-Mūsawī and al-Ṭabasī. The biographical 
entries are arranged typologically and chronologically, with the narrators 
divided into five major categories: (1) extremely inclined towards Shiʿism 

 206 ] 
Michael Dann
(thirteen narrators); (2) inclined towards Shiʿism (thirty-three narrators); 
(3) weakly inclined towards Shiʿism (twenty-four narrators); (4) wrongly 
accused of Shiʿism (111 narrators); and (5) narrators of indeterminate status 
(twenty narrators).60 What stands out in this typology is obviously the fact 
that Topgül considers 111 narrators, more than 50 per cent of the narrators he 
surveys, not to have been Shiʿis. Unique among Sunni authors, Topgül draws 
extensively on Imāmī biographical literature in his analysis. His use of this 
literature is even more comprehensive than that of the Imāmī scholars sur-
veyed above, but it is directed towards very different ends. The primary cri-
terion that determines whether or not a narrator can be properly considered 
a Shiʿi is in fact the nature and extent of his incorporation in Imāmī biograph-
ical literature, almost irrespective of the extent of his association with Shiʿism 
in Sunni literature. (Sūdānī applies the same reasoning in her dismissal of the 
charge of Shiʿism from ʿAbd al-Razzāq, but she does not employ this method 
systematically.61) This is essentially a methodological choice, and one that 
is supported by a certain logic. As Topgül notes, the terms used to denote 
Shiʿism among hadith scholars in Islam’s early centuries were elastic and did 
not necessarily connote sectarian phenomena.62 However, choosing to make 
the normative doctrines that eventually settled among Imāmīs the primary 
historical criterion for evaluating the existence of Shiʿism in any time period 
and any milieu entails the dismissal of more than half of the evidence sur-
veyed by Topgül. It also precludes serious consideration of the myriad ques-
tions that would arise concerning the type of Shiʿism observed and described 
by early Sunni hadith critics, which seems so unfamiliar precisely because 
of the dominance of the conventional (Imāmī–)Shiʿi–Sunni binary. With 
respect to such questions, Topgül allows the taxonomies of early Shiʿism 
offered by Mamlūk-era hadith scholars such as Ibn Ḥajar and al-Dhahabī, as 
well as those of figures from outside the hadith tradition such as (Pseudo-)
al-Nāshiʾ al-Akbar, to stand as they are. However, as argued by Ibn ʿAqīl, 
these  taxonomies are not free of Sunni bias.
Conclusion
At the outset of this survey of Islamic scholarship on Shiʿi narrators, I posed 
three questions: (1) what was the extent of Shiʿi narrators’ participation in the 
proto-Sunni traditionist milieux?; (2) did the taxonomies of Shiʿism created 
by medieval Sunni authors accurately reflect the spectrum of Shiʿi doctrines 
and affiliations in these milieux?; (3) to what extent did the theoretical posi-
tions on narrating from innovators adopted in the Sunni science of hadith 
accord with the practices of early compilers? This survey demonstrates that 
on all three points, the body of Islamic scholarship on these narrators signifi-
cantly advances the state of our knowledge. With respect to the first ques-
tion, the compilations of Imāmī cataloguers and the study of Topgül give us a 
sense of how widespread association with Shiʿism was in the early tradition-
alist milieux. Sūdānī’s survey also gives us a sense of the central role played 

  
Can Different Questions Yield the Same Answers?  
[ 207
by some of these narrators in transmitting hadiths in collections that Sunnis 
would eventually recognise as canonical, even if the results of her survey are 
truncated by her choice not to consider many of the most prominent narra-
tors associated with Shiʿism.
With respect to the second question, it is the Sunni critics, Ibn ʿAqīl and 
al-Ghumārī, who highlight the subtle biases and tendency towards domesti-
cation inherent in the Sunni tradition’s reception of Shiʿi narrators. Al-ʿAwnī, 
a Sunni apologist, helps to attenuate the conclusions of these critics by adduc-
ing evidence that they ignore in constructing their polemical attacks. With 
respect to the third question, Sūdānī, Abū Zāyid, al-ʿAwnī and al-Ghumārī 
all offer insights that help us to understand the intricate choices made by 
Sunni hadith compilers as they navigated a nascent discourse on narrating 
from innovators that would be codified in the genre of ʿulūm al-ḥadīth in later 
centuries. Sunni authors aiming for the highest standard of authenticity, 
such as al-Bukhārī and Muslim, seem to have heeded theoretical limitations 
on narrating hadiths from innovators that support their innovation, without 
treating such limitations as absolute.
A voice that is noticeably absent from these debates, and which would 
certainly introduce a complementary perspective if it were present, is that 
of the Zaydīs. In the early modern period, the topic of Shiʿi narrators in the 
Sunni tradition was taken up by several Zaydīs as the Zaydī scholarly estab-
lishment in Yemen gradually became more and more engaged with Sunni 
traditionalist thought. These scholars were critical of the Sunni reception of 
Shiʿi narrators, without necessarily attempting to annex their legacy, as has 
often been the case with Imāmīs. This Zaydī scholarship reverberates faintly 
into the modern period through the mediation of Ibn ʿAqīl and al-Ghumārī, 
but is ignored for the most part by both Imāmīs and Sunnis. I am aware 
of only one modern Zaydī scholar who has written anything on the topic, 
and he depends to a large extent, ironically, on the work of Ibn ʿAqīl, along 
with earlier Zaydī discussions.63 One of the major activities that led to the 
association of certain narrators with Shiʿism was their support for ʿAlid 
rebellions, an activity that became, over time, the hallmark of the Zaydīs. 
Although support for these rebellions is occasionally mentioned by Imāmīs 
and Sunnis, it is by and large a blind spot in modern Islamic scholarship, 
and one that would likely be filled in through the incorporation of a Zaydī 
perspective.64
The fact that neither Imāmīs nor Sunnis substantially incorporate Zaydī 
literature in their studies is but one indication that their scholarship is aimed 
primarily at addressing normative questions of orthodoxy and sectarian 
boundaries foreign to the Western historical tradition. The scholarship 
surveyed above exists on a spectrum in terms of the relative centrality of 
historical and normative questions. For scholars like Sūdānī and Topgül, his-
torical questions are primary, although the conclusions reached are shaped 
by normative commitments. For scholars like al-Ghumārī, Ibn ʿAqīl and 
al-Ḥilw, normative questions are primary, but can be addressed effectively 

 208 ] 
Michael Dann
only through a re-evaluation of tradition that rests on historical critique. 
Whatever the particular balance between historical and normative concerns 
in this scholarship, and wherever individual scholars fall on the spectrum of 
Sunni and Shiʿi commitments, we see that the historical problem of sectar-
ian ambiguity is refracted through present sectarian commitments that rest 
on the assumption of an ahistorical, essentialised meaning of Shiʿism. For 
Sunnis, this assumption generally results in the downplaying, discounting 
and domestication of the sort of Shiʿism that was an integral, if controver-
sial, component of the proto-Sunni milieu. For Shiʿis, it leads to a near-total 
omission of intra-Shiʿi diversity, whereby anything labelled as Shiʿism nec-
essarily stands in continuity with Imāmism and lends historical depth to its 
narrative. The exceptions to these tendencies – Ibn ʿAqīl and al-Ghumārī on 
the Sunni side and al-Ḥilw and ʿAzīzī, Rastagār and Bayāt on the Shiʿi side – 
merely serve to prove the rule.
Western historians tend to view sectarian categories as inherently unsta-
ble, evolving and perspectival; they serve as so much fodder for our counter-
narratives.65 In spite of this general recognition, there is much to suggest that, 
at least in certain respects, there is no exit from the sectarian hall of mirrors. 
In a recent article on al-Nasāʾī, the aforementioned compiler of the last 
canonical work of hadith recognised by Sunnis, Christopher Melchert labels 
al-Nasāʾī as a Shiʿi.66 Using the term in such a way clearly implies that it need 
not carry specifically sectarian connotations and can potentially refer to indi-
viduals who held characteristically Shiʿi sentiments or doctrines in spite of 
otherwise firm Sunni commitments. A contrasting approach is found in the 
work of scholars like Najam Haider and Wilferd Madelung. Haider defines 
Shiʿism as a sectarian phenomenon and views figures that lack a clear sectar-
ian identity as proto-Sunnis, even if they were labelled, for example, as Batrī 
Zaydīs or Shiʿis.67 The problem comes into sharp relief in a dispute between 
two doyens of the field, Madelung and van Ess, where van Ess characterises 
certain pro-ʿAlid Muʿtazilīs of the medieval period as Shiʿis while Madelung 
considers this to be a contradiction in terms. Van Ess’s  terminological/typo-
logical error, Madelung avers, ultimately stems from his belief that Shiʿism 
emerged with the assassination of ʿUthmān, rather than with the succes-
sion dispute that took place in the Saqīfah of the Banī Saʿīdah.68 Put simply, 
Western historians whose work focuses primarily on Sunnis, exemplified 
here by Melchert and van Ess, tend to adopt a maximalist sense of Shiʿism 
similar to that adopted by Imāmīs surveyed in this chapter. Western histo-
rians whose work focuses primarily on Shiʿis, exemplified here by Haider 
and Madelung, tend to adopt a more restrictive sense of Shiʿism similar 
to that adopted by Sunnis like Topgül and Sūdānī. We may not set out to 
valorise particular sectarian narratives over others or to make the norma-
tive judgements that divide one sect from another, but our terminological 
choices and historical judgements ineluctably participate in the continual 
refiguration of such narratives and boundaries. Ultimately, we can concur 
with Gadamer that while the ends of the judge and the legal historian are 

  
Can Different Questions Yield the Same Answers?  
[ 209
markedly different, there is no absolute distinction between their methods.69 
In the case at hand, the substantive conclusions of one considerably enrich 
the discussions of the other.
Notes
 1. On the Shiʿi inclinations of al-Nasāʾī and his death at the hands of an angry 
mob, see Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad al-Dhahabī, Siyar aʿlām al-nubalāʾ, ed. Shuʿayb 
al-Arnaʾūṭ et al., 25 vols (Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Risālah, 1981–8), 14:132–3; 
al-Dhahabī, Tadhkirat al-ḥuffāẓ, 4 vols (Beirut: Dār Iḥyāʾ al-Turāth al-ʿArabī, 
1956–8), 2:700–1; Jamāl al-Dīn Yūsuf al-Mizzī, Tahdhīb al-Kamāl fī asmāʾ al-rijāl, 
ed. Bashshār ʿAwwād Maʿrūf, 35 vols (Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Risālah, 1982–92), 
1:338–9; Christopher Melchert, ‘The Life and Works of al-Nasāʾī’, Journal of 
Semitic Studies 59 (2014): 403–5.
 2. The most explicit argument regarding the substantial historiographical insights 
yielded by certain normative Islamic scholarship is found in Walid Saleh, 
‘Marginalia and Peripheries: a Tunisian Historian and the History of Qur’anic 
Exegesis’, Numen 58 (2011): 284–313. Behnam Sadeghi also laments the lack 
of attention among Western scholars to achievements in the field of variant 
Qurʾānic readings in his article ‘The Codex of a Companion of the Prophet and 
the Qurʾān of the Prophet’, Arabica 57 (2010): 414–15. His preference for Mehdi 
Bazargan’s chronology of Qurʾānic chapters over the more traditionally accepted 
chronology of Theodor Nöldeke as the basis for his stylometric analysis of the 
Qurʾān can also be read as an implicit argument in this regard: Behnam Sadeghi, 
‘The Chronology of the Qurʾān: a Stylometric Research Program’, Arabica 58 
(2011): 210–99.
 3. Christopher Melchert, ‘Sectaries in the Six Books’, Muslim World 82 (1992): 
287–95.
 4. G. H. A. Juynboll, Muslim Tradition (New York: Cambridge University Press, 
1983), 179; Eerik Dickinson, The Development of Early Sunnite ḥadīth Criticism: the 
Taqdima of Ibn Abī Ḥātim al-Rāzī, Islamic History and Civilization, Studies and 
Texts, 38 (Boston, MA: Brill, 2001), 102–4; Scott Lucas, Constructive Critics, Ḥadīth 
Literature, and the Articulation of Sunnī Islam: the Legacy of the Generation of Ibn Saʿd, 
Ibn Maʿīn, and Ibn Ḥanbal, Islamic History and Civilization, Studies and Texts, 51 
(Boston, MA: Brill, 2004), 320–4.
 5. See, for example, the discussions found in al-Khaṭīb al-Baghdādī, al-Kifāyah fī ʿilm 
al-riwāyah, Min dhakhāʾir al-maktabah al-islāmīyah fī rijāl al-ḥadīth (Cairo: Dār 
al-Kutub al-Ḥadīthah, 1972), 194–210; Abū ʿAbd Allāh al-Ḥākim al-Naysābūrī, 
al-Madkhal ilá Kitāb al-Iklīl, ed. Fuʾād ʿAbd al-Munʿim Aḥmad (Alexandria: Dār 
al-Daʿwah, 1983), 49; and Abū ʿAmr ibn al-Ṣalāḥ al-Shahrazūrī, Maʿrifat anwāʿ 
ʿulūm al-ḥadīth, ed. Nūr al-Dīn ʿItr (Beirut: Dār al-Fikr, 1986), 114–15. See also 
Eerik Dickinson’s translation of the last as An Introduction to the Science of Hadith 
(Reading: Garnet, 2005), 86–7.
 6. Jonathan A. C. Brown, Hadith: Muhammad’s Legacy in the Medieval and Modern 
World (Oxford: Oneworld, 2009), 141.

 210 ] 
Michael Dann
 7. Ghassan Abdul-Jabbar, Bukhari, Makers of Islamic Civilization (London: I. B. 
Tauris, 2007), 98.
 8. Juynboll, Muslim Tradition, 48–9; Melchert, ‘Sectaries in the Six Books’, 291. For 
more detail, see the section on ‘Sunni Critics’, below.
 9. Hossein Modarressi, Tradition and Survival (Oxford: Oneworld, 2003).
10. Liyakat N. Takim, The Heirs of the Prophet (Albany, NY: State University of New 
York Press, 2006), 163–80; Liyakatali Takim, ‘Evolution in the Biographical 
Profiles of Two Ḥadīth Transmitters’, in Lynda Clarke (ed.), Shīʿite Heritage 
(Binghamton: Global Publications, 2001), 285–99.
11. Cornelis van Arendonk, Les débuts de l’imamat zaidite au Yemen, Publications de la 
Fondation de Goeje, 18 (Leiden: Brill, 1960), 307–19.
12. Amikam Elad, The Rebellion of Muḥammad al-Nafs al-Zakiyya in 145/762, Islamic 
History and Civilisation; Studies and Texts, 118 (Boston, MA: Brill, 2016), 363–73; 
Amikam Elad, ‘The Rebellion of Muḥammad b. ʿAbd Allāh b. al-Ḥasan (Known 
as al-Nafs al-Zakīya) in 145/762’,in James E. Montgomery (ed.), ʿAbbasid Studies: 
Occasional Papers of the School of ʿAbbasid Studies, Cambridge, 6–10 July 2002, 
Orientalia Lovaniensia analecta, 135 (Dudley, MA: Peeters en Departement 
Oosterse Studies, 2004), 182–9; Maher Jarrar, ‘Ibn Abī Yaḥyā: a Controversial 
Medinan Akhbārī of the 2nd/8th Century’, in Nicolet Boekhoff-van der Voort 
et al. (eds), The Transmission and Dynamics of the Textual Sources of Islam, Islamic 
History and Civilization, Studies and Texts, 89 (Boston, MA: Brill, 2011), 206–9.
13. Jarrar, ‘Ibn Abī Yaḥyā’.
14. Najam Haider, The Origins of the Shīʿa: Identity, Ritual, and Sacred Space in Eighth-
Century Kūfa (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2011).
15. See Pseudo-al-Nāshiʾ al-Akbar, Masāʾil al-Imāma in frühe muʿtazilitische 
Häresiographie, ed. Josef van Ess, Beiruter Texte und Studien, 11 (Beirut: Franz 
Steiner, 1971).
16. Josef van Ess, Theologie und Gesellschaft im 2. und 3. Jahrhundert Hidschra, 6 vols 
(New York: Walter de Gruyter, 1991–5), 1:235–98, 334, 2:423–9, 716–19.
17. On the dubious origins of this work, its contents and its reception, see Rainer 
Brunner, Islamic Ecumenism in the 20th Century: the Azhar and Shiism between 
Rapprochement and Restraint, trans. Joseph Greenman, Social, Economic, and 
Political Studies of the Middle East and Asia, 91 (Boston, MA: Brill, 2004), 51–81. 
The authenticity of the work is itself a significant point of dispute between 
Sunnis and Shiʿis.
18. Sharaf al-Dīn al-Mūsawī, al-Murājaʿāt (Beirut: Muʾassasat al-Wafāʾ, 1983), 52–118.
19. Mūsawī, Murājaʿāt, 118–19.
20. Muḥammad Jaʿfar al-Ṭabasī, Rijāl al-Shīʿah fi asānīd al-sunnah (Qum: Muʾassasat 
al-Maʿārif al-Islāmīyah, 1420). Although many of these narrators were enumer-
ated among the ‘companions’ (aṣḥāb) of the Imāms, only a handful can be consid-
ered to have been Imāmīs sensu stricto. Imāmīs, like Sunnis, narrated from figures 
they considered to hold heretical beliefs, including Zaydīs and Sunnis. See Asma 
Afsaruddin, ‘An Insight into the Hadith Methodology of Jamāl al-Dīn Aḥmad b. 
Ṭāwūs’, Der Islam 72 (1995): 25–46.
21. Al-Ṭabasī, Rijāl al-Shīʿah, 15.

  
Can Different Questions Yield the Same Answers?  
[ 211
22. Muḥammad ʿAlī al-Ḥilw, Tārīkh al-ḥadīth al-nabawī bayna sulṭat al-naṣṣ wa-naṣṣ 
al-sulṭah (Dār al-Kitāb al-Islāmī, 2005), 41–56, and passim (it is noteworthy that 
the title contains an intentional but largely perfunctory allusion to the work 
of Naṣr Ḥāmid Abū Zayd, al-Naṣṣ, al-sulṭah, al-ḥaqīqah). Al-Ḥilw’s particular 
concern for cases of Shiʿi narrators who were rejected explicitly because of their 
narrations on ʿAlī’s virtues is exemplified by his frequent citation of Jalāl al-Dīn 
al-Suyūṭī’s (d. 911/1505) work on fabricated hadiths, al-Laʾāliʾ al-maṣnūʿah fī 
al-aḥādīth al-mawḍūʿah. From the perspective of Sunni scholars like al-Suyūṭī, 
these narrators were guilty of narrating munkar (‘uncorroborated’) reports. This 
was a flexible term that was generally understood to refer to a hadith narrated 
through a single chain of transmission that was not strong enough to establish it 
as reliable. At times, however, it was used to express objections to the contents 
of a hadith. See the discussion of munkar reports in Jonathan A. C. Brown, ‘How 
We Know Early Ḥadīth Critics Did Matn Criticism and Why It’s So Hard to Find’, 
Islamic Law and Society 15 (2008): 174–82.
23. Muḥammad al-Ḥusayn Āl Kāshif al-Ghiṭāʾ, Aṣl al-Shīʿah wa-uṣūluhā (Beirut: Dār 
al-Aḍwāʾ, 1990), 83–4.
24. See, for example, ʿAlī al-Ḥusaynī al-Mīlānī, Nafaḥāt al-azhār fī khulāṣat ʿabaqāt 
al-anwār (Iran: n.p., 1414); al-Mīlānī, Sharḥ Minhāj al-karāmah fī maʿrifat 
al-imāmah (Qum: Markaz al-Ḥaqāʾiq al-Islāmīyah, 2007); al-Mīlānī, Tashyīd 
al-murājaʿāt wa-tafnīd al-mukābarāt (Qum: Markaz al-Ḥaqāʾiq al-Islāmīyah, 
1997).
25. Ḥusayn ʿAzīzī, Parviz Rastagār and Yūsuf Bayāt, Rāviyān-i mushtarak: pizhūhishī 
dār bāzshināsī-yi rāviyān-i mushtarak-i Shīʿah va ahl-i Sunnat, 2 vols (Qum: Bustān-i 
Kitāb, 1380). This work was translated into Arabic and revised by ʿAbd al-Amīr 
al-Wardī, ʿAqīl al-Rabaʿī and Razzāq ʿAbd al-Rasūl under the title al-Ruwāh 
al-mushtarakūn bayna al-Shīʿah wa-al-Sunnah, 2 vols (Tehran: al-Majmaʿ al-ʿĀlamī 
lil-Taqrīb Bayna al-Madhāhib al-Islāmīyah, 2009). The Arabic edition of the 
work significantly reduced its scope, including biographical entries on only 
115 narrators and omitting the more comprehensive list of shared narrators 
altogether.
26. ʿAzīzī et al., Rāviyān-i mushtarak 1:43–7.
27. For example, compare the entries in the Persian original and the Arabic trans-
lation on the ‘Batrī Zaydīs’ Abū al-Miqdām Thābit ibn Hurmuz (ʿAzīzī et al., 
Rāviyān-i mushtarak 1:156–8; al-Wardī et al., al-Ruwāh 1:141–2), Ḥasan ibn Ṣāliḥ 
ibn Ḥayy (ʿAzīzī et al., Rāviyān-i mushtarak 1:226–30; al-Wardī et al., al-Ruwāh 
1:217–20), and Salamah ibn Kuhayl (ʿAzīzī et al., Rāviyān-i mushtarak 1:420–2; 
al-Wardī et al., al-Ruwāh 1:434–6). The publishers of the Arabic edition note that 
the original ‘lacks greater focus on the ecumenical trend.’
28. On Ibn ʿAqīl, see Werner Ende, ‘Schiitische Tendenzen bei Sunnitischen Sayyids 
aus Ḥaḍramaut: Muḥammad b. ʿAqīl al-ʿAlawī (1863–1931)’, Der Islam 50 
(1973): 82–97; William R. Roff, ‘Murder as an Aid to Social History’, in Huub 
de Jonge and Nico Kaptein (eds), Transcending Borders: Arabs, Politics, Trade and 
Islam in Southeast Asia, Proceedings/Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, Land- en 
Volkenkunde 5 (Leiden: KITLV Press, 2002), 91–108.

 212 ] 
Michael Dann
29. Muhammad ibn ʿAqīl al-ʿAlawī, al-Naṣāʾiḥ al-kāfiyah li-man yatawallá Muʿāwiyah 
(Najaf: Maṭbaʿat al-Nuʿmān, 1966); ibn ʿAqīl, Taqwiyat al-īmān bi-radd tazkiyat Ibn 
Abī Sufyān (Najaf: al-Maktabah al-Ḥaydarīyah, 1966).
30. Muhammad ibn ʿAqīl al-ʿAlawī, al-ʿAtb al-jamīl ʿalá ahl al-jarḥ wa-al-taʿdīl 
(Amman: Dār al-Imām al-Nawawī, 2004).
31. Aḥmad ibn ʿAlī ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī, Fatḥ al-bārī bi-sharḥ Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī, ed. 
ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz ibn ʿAbd Allāh ibn Bāz, 15 vols (Cairo: Dār al-Ḥadīth, 1998), 1:613.
32. Ibn Aqīl, al-ʿAtb al-jamīl, 30–1.
33. This definition in fact belongs to al-Dhahabī, whose work Mīzān al-iʿtidāl is 
abridged and expanded by Ibn Ḥajar in his Lisān al-Mīzān. Ibn Ḥajar, in any 
case, quotes it here with approval. See Aḥmad ibn ʿAlī ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī, 
Lisān al-Mīzān, ed. ʿAbd al-Fattāḥ Abū Ghuddah, 10 vols (Beirut: Dār al-Bashāʾir 
al-Islāmīyah, 2002), and Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad al-Dhahabī, Mīzān al-iʿtidāl fī 
naqd al-rijāl, ed. ʿAlī Muḥammad al-Bijāwī, 4 vols (Beirut: Dār al-Maʿrifah, 1963), 
1:5.
34. Ibn ʿAqīl, al-ʿAtb al-jamīl, 31.
35. Ibn ʿAqīl, al-ʿAtb al-jamīl, 32–3.
36. Ibn ʿAqīl, al-ʿAtb al-jamīl, 33–170.
37. It is likely that al-Ghumārī was influenced by Ibn ʿAqīl’s work on the topic. 
One of his polemical opponents in Morocco noted that he was enamoured of 
ibn ʿAqīl’s work and distributed it to colleagues after his return to Tangier from 
a sojourn in Cairo. See Muḥammad ibn al-Amīn Būkhubzah, Ṣaḥīfat sawābiq 
wa-jarīdat bawāʾiq.
38. On al-Harawī, see Michael Cooperson, Classical Arabic Biography: Heirs of the 
Prophets in the Age of al-Maʾmūn, Cambridge Studies in Islamic Civilization (New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 2000), 84–98.
39. Aḥmad ibn Ṣiddīq al-Ghumārī, Fatḥ al-Malik al-ʿAlī bi-ṣiḥḥat ḥadīth bāb madīnat 
al-ʿilm ʿAlī (n.p., 1969), 71.
40. Al-Ghumārī, Fatḥ, 63–73.
41. Al-Ghumārī, Fatḥ, 52–63.
42. Al-Ghumārī, Fatḥ, 73–6.
43. Al-Ghumārī, Fatḥ, 68. On al-Ṣanʿānī and his milieu, see Bernard Haykel, Revival 
and Reform in Islam: the Legacy of Muhammad al-Shawkani, Cambridge Studies in 
Islamic Civilization (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2003).
44. Aḥmad ibn Ṣiddīq al-Ghumārī, Juʾnat al-ʿaṭṭār fī ṭaraf al-fawāʾid wa-nawādir 
al-akhbār, 150, typescript available at: http://k-tb.com/book/Arabi05915, 
accessed 17 October 2019. Cf. Ibn al-Nadīm, Kitāb al-Fihrist, ed. Ayman Fuʾād 
Sayyid, Silsilat al-nuṣūṣ al-muḥaqqaqah, 4 vols, 2nd edn (London: Muʾassasat 
al-Furqān lil-Turāth al-Islāmī, 1435/2014), 1:639–40 (maqālah 5, fann 2).
45. Ibn ʿAqīl, al-ʿAtb al-jamīl, 49–51, 167–9. On al-Maqbalī, see M. M. Moreno, 
‘El-Maqbalī e il Sufismo’, Oriente Moderno 24 (1944): 7–16.
46. On the kind of relationship to tradition engendered by research practices 
in Islamic institutions of higher learning, see Muhammad Qasim Zaman, 
‘Epilogue: Competing Conceptions of Religious Education’, in Robert Hefner 
and Muhammad Qasim Zaman (eds), Schooling Islam: the Culture and Politics of 

  
Can Different Questions Yield the Same Answers?  
[ 213
Modern Muslim Education, Princeton Studies in Muslim Politics (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 2007), 242–68.
47. Al-Sharīf Ḥātim al-ʿAwnī, ʿAqlānīyat manhaj al-muḥaddithīn fī al-tathabbut min 
ʿadālat al-ruwāh, available at: www.dr-alawni.com/books, 128–38.
48. Al-ʿAwnī, ʿAqlānīyat manhaj al-muḥaddithīn, 119–25.
49. Al-ʿAwnī, ʿAqlānīyat manhaj al-muḥaddithīn, 105–8. On the practice of tadlīs and 
its various forms, see Abū ʿAbd Allāh al-Ḥākim al-Naysābūrī, Maʿrifat ʿulūm 
al-ḥadīth (Medina: al-Maktabah al-ʿIlmīyah, 1977), 103–12; al-Khaṭīb al-Baghdādī, 
Kifāyah, 510–27; Juynboll, Muslim Tradition, index, s.v. ‘tadlīs’; Brown, Hadith, 91, 
222–4.
50. Al-ʿAwnī, ʿAqlānīyat manhaj al-muḥaddithīn, 108–19, 140–7.
51. Karīma Sūdānī, Manhaj al-Imām al-Bukhārī fī al-riwāyah ʿan al-mubtadiʿah min khilāl 
al-Jāmiʿ al-ṣaḥīḥ, Silsilat al-Rushd lil-rasāʾil al-jāmiʿīyah, 106 (Riyadh: Maktabat 
al-Rushd, 2004), 41–88.
52. Sūdānī, Manhaj, 242–5, 260–2. For evidence of ʿAbd al-Razzāq’s criticism of 
certain Companions, see, for example, ʿAlī ibn al-Ḥasan ibn ʿAsākir, Tārīkh 
madīnat Dimashq, ed. Muḥibb al-Dīn Abū Saʿīd ʿUmar ibn Gharāmah al-ʿAmrawī, 
80 vols (Beirut: Dār al-Fikr, 1995–2000), 36:187–9. For Khālid ibn Makhlad, see 
Aḥmad ibn ʿAlī ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī, Tahdhīb al-Tahdhīb (Beirut: Dār al-Fikr, 
1984), 3:101.
53. For reports on the Shiʿism of Manṣūr ibn al-Muʿtamir, see, for example, 
Muḥammad ibn Saʿd, K. al-Ṭabaqāt al-kubrá, 9 vols (Beirut: Dār Ṣādir, 1968), 
6:338; Aḥmad ibn ʿAbd Allāh al-ʿIjlī, Tārīkh al-thiqāt (Madina: Maktabat al-Dār, 
1405), 2:299; Abū al-Faraj al-Iṣfahānī, Maqātil al-Ṭālibīyīn, ed. Aḥmad Ṣaqr (Cairo: 
Dār Iḥyāʾ al-Kutub al-ʿArabīyah, 1949), 145, 148. On Sulaymān ibn Mihrān 
al-Aʿmash, see Haider, Origins, 221–30; EIr, s.n. ‘Aʿmash’, by Etan Kohlberg; van 
Ess, Theologie und Gesellschaft 1:237–9.
54. Sūdānī, Manhaj, 283–446. Cf. al-Ghumārī, Juʾnat al-ʿaṭṭār, 76, where he notes that 
al-Bukhārī narrated a hadith including Muḥammad’s statement to ʿAlī, ‘You 
are from me and I am from you’ from ʿUbayd Allāh ibn Mūsá (d. 213/829?), 
a well-known Shiʿi. This statement occurs as part of a longer hadith about the 
treaty of Ḥudaybīyah and was placed by al-Bukhārī in the chapter on ʿumrat 
al-qaḍāʾ (al-maghāzī 44, bāb ʿumrat al-qaḍāʾ, No. 4251) and as a muʿallaq hadith in 
his chapter on ʿAlī’s virtues (faḍāʾil aṣḥāb al-nabī 9, bāb manāqib ʿAlī). Sūdānī men-
tions the narration in the chapter on ʿumrat al-qaḍāʾ without commenting on its 
implications for ʿAlī’s virtues (Manhaj, 395).
55. Jamāl Abū Zāyid, ‘al-Aḥādīth al-muntaqadah ʿinda al-shaykhayn fī bāb al-riwāyah 
al-muqawwiyah li-bidʿat ruwātihā’, presented at Muʾtamar al-intiṣār lil-Ṣaḥīḥayn, 
Amman, Jordan, 14–15 July 2010, available at: http://www.hadith-turath.org/
library/60305#.WQZxOKPMyCQ, last accessed 30 April 2017.
56. Al-ʿAwnī, ʿAqlānīyat manhaj al-muḥaddithīn, 148–50.
57. Muhammad Enes Topgül, ‘Hadis Râvilerinde Şiîlik Eğilimi’, Master’s thesis, 
Marmara University, 2010, 17–32.
58. Topgül, ‘Hadis Râvilerinde Şiîlik Eğilimi’, 58–9, 66–7.
59. Muhammad Enes Topgül, ‘Bir Cerh Sebebi Olarak Teşeyyu’ (Şiîlik Eğilimi) 

 214 ] 
Michael Dann
Kavramına Tarihsel Bir Bakış,’, Marmara Üniversitesi lâhiyat Fakültesi Dergisi 42 
(2012): 47–76.
60. Topgül, ‘Hadis Râvilerinde Şiîlik Eğilimi’, 84–337.
61. Sūdānī, Manhaj, 242–5.
62. Topgül, ‘Hadis Râvilerinde Şiîlik Eğilimi’, 58–9.
63. ʿAbd Allāh ibn Ḥammād al-ʿIzzī, ʿUlūm al-ḥadīth ʿinda al-Zaydīyah wa-al-
muḥaddithīn, 171–213.
64. For instances of attention to the support of Shiʿi narrators for ʿAlid rebellions, see 
Topgül, ‘Hadis Râvilerinde Şiîlik Eğilimi’, 211; ʿAzīzī, Rāviyān-i mushtarak, 456.
65. See, for example, the comments of Daniel Boyarin, Border Lines: the Partition of 
Judaeo-Christianity, Divinations (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 
2006), 6–7.
66. Melchert, ‘Life and Works’, 403–5.
67. Haider, Origins, 221–30; Najam Haider, Shīʿī Islam (New York: Cambridge 
University Press, 2014), 103–11.
68. Wilferd Madelung, ‘Review of Josef van Ess, Das Eine und das Andere’, Studien zur 
Geschichte und Kultur des islamischen Orients (2004); n.F., 23, 2 vols (Berlin: Walter 
de Gruyter, 2011), in Journal of the American Oriental Society 134 (2013): 531–3.
69. Hans-Georg Gadamer, Truth and Method (New York: Continuum, 2004), 321–36.

 [ 215 ]
Index
Abān ibn Abī ʿAyyāsh
madār, 109–10
ʿAbbās al-Dūrī, 76
ʿAbbāsids, 9–10, 19–20, 32, 52, 70, 94, 134, 
192, 197
erection of beacons, 47n
erection of lighthouse towers, 47n
erection of milestones, 47n
Abbott, Nabia, 12
Abdak, 58
abdāl, 88n
ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz ibn ʿAbd Allāh al-Uwaysī, 14
ʿAbd Allāh al-Ḥabashī, 160
ʿAbd Allāh al-Saʿd, 163
ʿAbd Allāh ibn Aḥmad, 60, 74
ʿAbd Allāh ibn Dīnār, 100
ʿAbd Allāh ibn Khamīs, 155
ʿAbd Allāh ibn Salamah
madār, 109
ʿAbd Allāh ibn Yazīd, 58
ʿAbd Allāh ibn Zayd
and the creation of adhān, 42, 44
ʿAbd al-Karīm al-Wuraykāt
student of Hammām Saʿīd, 163
ʿAbd al-Karīm ibn Abī al-Mukhāriq
madār, 110
ʿAbd al-Majīd al-Muḥtasib, 49
ʿAbd al-Malik ibn Marwān
and Ibn al-Zubayr, 175–6
policy on mawālī, 25n
Qurʾān project, 16–17, 19–20
ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Isḥāq al-Wāsiṭī
madār, 111
ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Mahdī, 58
on Abū al-ʿĀliyah, 107
on hadith criticism, 104
on madār, 107
ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Ziyād al-Ifrīqī
madār, 111
ʿAbd al-Razzāq al-Ṣanʿānī, 28–9, 60, 181
adhān hadith, 31
and ʿAlī’s Nabatean heritage, 25n
possible interpolator of al-Zuhrī hadith, 
19–20
Shiʿism, 204, 206
ʿAbd al-Salām Abū Samḥah
study of munkar, 164
ʿAbd al-Wahhāb, al-Qāḍī, 141
Abdul-Jabbar, Ghassan, 194
Abū al-Ṣalt ʿAbd al-Salām ibn Ṣāliḥ al-
Harawī, 201
ʿAbdān ʿAbd Allāh ibn ʿUthmān, 56, 61
collector of Ibn al-Mubārak’s al-Istiʾdhān, 61
Abū Burdah, 100
Abū ʿAbd Allāh Muḥammad al-Ṣūrī, 74
Abū al-ʿAbbās al-Sarrāj, 14
Abū al-ʿAbbās ibn ʿAṭāʾ al-Ādamī, 77
Abū al-ʿĀliyah Rufayʿ b. Mihrān al-Riyāḥī,  
61
as a madār, 99, 108
Abū Ayyūb al-Anṣārī, 108, 111
Abū al-Dardāʾ, 2, 67n
Abū al-Ḥasan ʿAlī ibn Jahḍam al-Hamadhānī, 
76
Abū al-Ḥusayn al-Baṣrī
on hadith contradicting qiyās, 139
Abū al-Qāsim al-Junayd, 72
Abū al-Malīḥ al-Ḥasan ibn ʿUmar al-Raqqī
possible transmitter to Dāwūd ibn 
Rushayd, 14–15
Abū al-Malīḥ ibn Usāmah ibn ʿUmayr
possible transmitter to Dāwūd ibn 
Rushayd, 14–15
Abū al-Miqdām ʿAmr ibn Thābit al-Kūfī

 216 ] 
Index
Abū al-ʿUsharāʾ
majhūl, 100
Abū al-Walīd al-Ṭayālisī, 1
Abū ʿAlī al-Naysābūrī, 83
Abū Bakr
Qurʾān project, 12
Abū Bakr Aḥmad ibn Hārūn al-Bardījī
on munkar, 105
Abū Bakr ibn Abī al-Naḍr, 29
Abū Dāwūd, 29, 57, 73, 76, 83–4, 89n, 157
on gharīb, 113
Abū Dharr, 67n
Abū Ghuddah ʿAbd al-Fattāḥ 
and al-Albānī, 152, 160
as a hadith critic, 151, 161
on Abū Ḥanīfah, 160
on al-Dhahabī, 162
on Ibn Ḥajar, 162
Abū Ḥāmid ibn Jabalah, 14
Abū Ḥanīfah, 49–50, 56–7, 64n, 134, 160, 181
Abū Ḥātim al-Rāzī, 83
on munkar, 105
Abū Hurayrah, 1, 103, 110–11, 140, 174
Abū Isḥāq al-Shīrāzī, 133
as a Shāfiʿī rationalist, 131
on rejecting unreasonable Hadith, 132
Abū Isḥāq ʿAmr ibn ʿAbd Allāh al-Sabīʿī
as a madār, 107
Abū Jaʿfar Muḥammad ibn Abī Ḥātim, 2
Abū Janāb al-Kalbī
madār, 111
Abū Kāmil, 157
Abū Kurayb Muḥammad ibn al-ʿAlāʾ, 100
Abū Mūsá al-Ashʿarī, 100
Abū Naṣr al-Sarrāj, 58
Abū Naṣr al-Ṭūsī, 74
Abū Nuʿaym al-Faḍl ibn Dukayn, 83
Abū Nuʿaym al-Iṣfahānī, 11–14, 59–60, 71–5, 
80, 83, 90n, 93n
Abū Qilābah, 34
Abū Qudāmah Ḥārith ibn ʿUbayd al-Iyādī
discredited by Yaḥyá ibn Maʿīn, 109
madār, 109
Abū Rayyah, Maḥmūd, 173
on Companions, 185n
Abū Ṣāliḥ, 1
Abū Saʿīd al-Khudrī, 109
Abū Thawr, 57
Abū ʿUbayd, 11–12
commencement of Hadith study, 13
commentary on hadith about taxation, 22n
explanation of hadith on awrād, 16
ignorance of al-Shāfiʿī’s legal theory, 22n
interpolation of an isnād, 22n
questionable citation of ʿUqayl ibn Khālid, 
13
Abū Usāmah Ḥammād ibn Usāmah, 100
Abū Wahb Muḥammad ibn Muzāḥim, 56
Abū Yaʿlá al-Khalīlī
on shādhdh, 105
Abū Yūsuf
on hadith contradicting inherited tradition, 
134, 140
on hadith contradicting the Qurʾān, 134
on Sunnah, 134
Abū Zakarīyāʾ al-Naysābūrī, 83
Abū Zayd, Naṣr Hāmid, 180
Abū Zayid, Jamāl, 205
Abū Zurʿah al-Rāzī, 53, 83
on Ghaylān conversion hadith, 161
adhān
and an angel, 42
and Bilāl, 28, 33, 36
and būq, 28, 30–1, 35–6, 38, 41, 46n
and Christians, 27–8, 31, 33, 35, 40
and Donner’s ‘Qurʾānicization’ hypothesis, 
46n
and dreams, 28, 36, 38–9, 41–2, 44
and fire, 28, 33, 35, 47n
and Jews, 27–8, 31, 33, 35, 41, 46n
and nāqūs, 28, 33, 35–6, 38–40, 47n
and qarn, 28, 30–1, 35–6
and the Shīʿah, 32, 42, 44
and trumpet, 28, 31, 39–41, 46n
and Zoroastrians, 35
creation by ʿAbd Allāh ibn Zayd, 42, 44
creation by ʿUmar, 28, 31–2, 36, 44
diverse treatment of formulae of, 42
growth and creation of origins-narratives, 
27
modification by ʿUthmān, 32, 46n
number of takbīr, 34
origins narratives, 28–9
pre-history in the Qurʾān, 31
Aḥmad ʿAbd Allāh, 164
Aḥmad Amīn, 173
on matn criticism, 185n
Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal, 28–9, 51, 54–5, 57, 60, 72, 
75–6, 83–4, 94n
and Mālik’s ziyādah, 100
and tawakkul, 59, 67n
commentary on Ibn Sīrīn and kitāb, 23n
on gharīb, 101, 104–5
on Ghaylān conversion hadith, 161
on hadith contradicting the Qurʾān, 135
on Hushaym ibn Bashīr, 101
on ijmāʿ, 137
on munkar, 104–5
on qiyās, 139
on shādhdh, 101, 104–5
on comparing hadith transmissions, 103
Ahmed Naim, Babanzade, 173
Aḥmad Shākir, 154, 158, 160
and ẓāhir al-isnād, 159
on al-Tirmidhī, 162
Aḥwaṣ ibn al-Ḥakīm, al-, 2

  
Index 
[ 217
ʿĀʾishah, 108
Akseki, Ahmet Hamdi, 174
Āl Kāshif al-Ghiṭāʾ, Muḥammad al-Ḥusayn, 
198
Albānī, Nāṣir al-Dīn, al-
and Aḥmad Shākir, 154, 158, 160
and Ḥasan al-Bannā, 155
and Ibn ʿAbd al-Wahhāb, 155
and madhhabī Traditionalism, 167–8n
and Muḥammad Rashīd Riḍā, 154
and Muqbil ibn Hādī al-Wādiʿī, 159
and Muṣṭafá al-ʿAdawī, 159
and Muṣṭafá al-Sibāʿī, 154
and qarāʾin, 158
and revival of hadith sciences, 153, 164
and Saʿīd al-Burhānī, 155
and Salafism, 159
and Saudi Arabia, 155
and Sayyid Sābiq, 155
and the Muslim Brotherhood, 154–5
and ẓāhir al-isnād, 156–8, 164–5
as a modern hadith critic, 151
compared with early hadith critics, 169n
criticism of, 160, 165
criticism of Abū Dāwūd, 157
criticism of al-Mallībārī, 164
criticism of al-Bayhaqī, 157
criticism of al-Dāraquṭnī, 157
criticism of Muslim, 157
development and career, 153–6
influence in the Levant, 155–6
influence in the Arabophone world, 156
method of Hadith criticism, 156
on a judgement by al-Bukhārī and al-
Tirmidhī, 157
on ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz, 157
on Abū Kāmil, 157
on ziyādah, 156–8
Algar, Hamid, 75
ʿAlqamah ibn Waqqāṣ al-Laythī, 107
ʿAlī, ʿIṣām Muḥammad al-Ḥājj, 49–50
ʿAlī al-Ḥusaynī al-Mīlānī
defence of Shiʿi hadith transmitters, 198
ʿAlī al-Riḍā, 201
ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib, 109, 125n, 175, 194, 197, 
199–201, 211n, 213n
ʿAlī ibn Baḥr, 2
ʿAlī ibn Sahl al-Iṣfahānī, 77
Aʿmash, Sulaymān ibn Mihrān al-, 1, 102
and Shiʿism, 204
élitism in hadith, 25–6n
madār, 107
Amīn, al-, 19, 58
ʿAmrah, 108
ʿAmr ibn Dīnār
madār, 107
ʿAmr ibn Jābir al-Ḥaḍramī
madār, 111
ʿAmr ibn Thābit, 60, 68n
ʿAmr ibn ʿUbayd, 60
Anas ibn Mālik, 28, 34, 109
Arberry, A. J.
on al-Qushayrī, 76
Asʿad Tayyim
as a student of Hammām Saʿīd, 163
ʿĀṣim al-Najjār
publisher of Ibn al-Aʿrābī, al-Zuhd, 73
ʿĀṣim ibn ʿUmar ibn Qatādah
madār, 110
aṣḥāb al-raʾy, 57
Asmandī, al-
on hadith contradicting qiyās, 139
Asmarī, Saʿīd ibn ʿAlī ibn ʿAbd Allāh Āl 
Nāshiʿ, al-, 69n
ʿAṭīyah ibn Saʿd al-ʿAwfī, 109
awliyāʾ, 88n
ʿAwnī, al-Sharīf Ḥātim al-
and the qarāʾin school, 163
apologist, 204
as a Salafi, 163
career, 203
criticism by Dann, 205
disagreement with al-Albānī, 163
on ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Khirāsh al-
Marwazī, 203
on hadith transmission from Shiʿis, 203,  
205
on hadith transmission from Nāṣibīs, 203
versus al-Mūsawī and Ibn ʿAqīl, 203
Aws ibn Ḍamʿaj al-Ḥaḍramī, 108
ʿAynī, al-
on ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Isḥāq al-Wāsiṭī, 111
on madār, 110–11
Ayyūb al-Sakhtiyānī, 66n, 103
Aʿẓamī, Ḥabīb al-Raḥmān al-, 61–2
ʿAzīzī, Ḥusayn
engagement with Imāmī literature, 199
Bājī, al- 141
on hadith contradicting qiyās, 139
Bakr ibn ʿAbd Allāh al-Muzanī
madār, 108–9
Barāʾ ibn ʿĀzib, al- 140
Barbahārī, al-, 59
Baron, 174
Bayāt, Yūsuf
engagement with Imāmī literature, 199
Bayhaqī, al- 29
on Abān ibn Abī ʿAyyāsh, 110
on al-Aʿmash, 110
on al-Haramī ibn ʿAbd Allāh, 111
on madār, 109
Bazdawī, al-
on hadith contradicting qiyās, 139
Berg, Herbert
on authenticity deadlock, 3

 218 ] 
Index
Bishrī, Salīm al-
and al-Mūsawī, 196–7
Bīṭār, Muḥammad Bahjah al-, 152
Bonner, Michael
on Ibn al-Mubārak, 52
Böwering, Gerhard
publisher of al-Khuldī’s juzʾ, 74
Brown, Jonathan
good surveyor of hadith science, 7n
on Muslim’s transmitting a Shiʿi hadith, 
194
on Sufism and hadith, 75
on Sufism and isnāds, 75–7
on the canonisation of the Ṣaḥīḥayn, 71, 80
Bukhārī, Muḥammad ibn Ismāʿīl al-, 28–9, 32, 
34, 55, 83–4, 164
and mutābiʿāt and shawāhid, 104
canonisation of his Ṣaḥīḥ, 71, 80
combining adhān hadiths, 31
commentary on a hadith, 2, 100
on Ghaylān conversion hadith, 161
Bukhārī, Muḥammad Saʿīd ibn Muḥammad 
Ḥasan Aḥmad, 51–4, 60–1 
Burayd ibn ʿAbd Allāh ibn Abī Burdah, 100
Burhānī, Saʿīd al-, 155
Būṣīrī, al-, 110–11
Caetani, Leone
criticism by Ahmed Naim, 173
criticism by Hatiboğlu, 176
criticism by Okiç, 174
translation of his Annali dell’Islam into 
Turkish, 182, 185n
Cevdet, Abdullah, 173
Companions
Sunni dogma of collective reliability of, 6
Cook, Michael
on al-Zuhrī and the writing of Hadith, 10
Cornell, Rkia, 76
Daäif, Lahcen, 75
Dār al-Ḥadīth al-Ashrafīyah, 152
Dāraquṭnī, ʿAlī al-, 72–3, 77–8, 83, 89n, 94–5n
on Bakr ibn ʿAbd Allāh al-Muzanī, 108–9
on gharīb, 101–2
on Jarīr ibn ʿAbd al-Ḥamīd, 102
on madār, 108
on tafarrud, 102
Dārimī, al-, 15, 29
Dāwūd ibn Rushayd, 14
de Goeje, Michael Jan, 174
Denaro, Roberta, 51–2
Dhahabī, al- 50, 72–4, 78, 80–1, 87–9n, 93n, 
95n, 159, 161–2, 175
on Shiʿism, 194, 206
Dhū al-Aṣābiʿ al-Juhanī, 108
Dhuhlī, Abū ʿAbd Allāh Muḥammad ibn 
Yaḥyā al-, 83–4
Doğanay, Süleyman
on common links, 179
on Western Hadith scholarship, 179
Dozy, Reinhart, 173–4
Turkish translation of, 182
Dūrī, Riyāḍ Aḥmad Ibrāhīm al-, 50
Elad, Amikam
on traditionists and rebellions, 195
Faḍālah al-Nasawī, 56
Fasawī, al-, 11, 14, 18
Ghazālī, Abū Ḥāmid al-
as synthesiser of Sufism and Sunni 
orthodoxy, 76
on Hadith contradicting the practice of 
Companions, 141–2
Ghulām Khalīl, 59
Ghumārī, Aḥmad ibn Ṣiddīq al-
and Ibn ʿAqīl, 212n
and Zaydī authorities, 201–2
on al-Bukhārī’s transmission from Shiʿis, 
201
on anti-ʿAlid bias in Sunni hadith, 201
on Ibn al-Nadīm, 202
on Ibrāhīm ibn Yaʿqūb al-Jūzajānī, 201
on Muslim’s transmission from Shiʿis, 201
on Ibn al-Amīr al-Ṣanʿānī, 201–2
Global Assembly for Rapprochement 
between Islamic Schools
conference on Shiʿi hadith transmitters in 
Sunni hadith collections, 198
Goldziher, Ignaz
criticism by Goitein, 187n
in Turkish scholarship, 179
Muslim discomfort towards, 6
on ʿAbd al-Malik and al-Zuhrī, 175, 187n
on al-Qushayrī, 76
on al-Zuhrī, 175
on the authenticity of hadith, 3, 175
Turkish translation of, 177
Guillaume, Alfred
Turkish reception of, 178
hadith
al-jarḥ wa–al-taʿdīl, 104
and advocates of the created Qurʾān, 193
and dreams, 47n
and Jabrīs, 193
and Khārijīs, 193
and Qadarīs, 193
and Shiʿis, 192–208
authenticity of, 2–4, 6
common link, 114–16
contradictory, 3
contradicting the Qurʾān, 133
definition of, 1

  
Index 
[ 219
development of Western scholarship on, 4
Egypt as a centre of, 3, 183
English names for, 1
gharīb, 101–2, 130
imperfect transmission of, 2–3
iʿtibār, 103–4
India as a centre of, 3, 183
madār, 106–16, 118n
munkar, 104–6, 130
Muslim (Qurʾānist) rejection of, 3
mutābiʿ, 103–4
Principle of Dissimilarity applied to, 6
shādhdh, 104–6, 130
shāhid, 103–4
Six Books, 50, 53, 78, 83
source of law, 2
source of Sunnah, 1
source of theology, 2
supplement to Qurʾān, 2
tafarrud, 104–6, 118n, 130
transmission networks, 79–82
Turkey as a centre of, 6, 171–83
use by jurists versus story-tellers, 45
use by jurists versus hadith critics, 131–2
weight relative to Qurʾān and ijmāʿ, 3, 
133–7
Western criticism analogous to biblical 
criticism, 6
writing of, 9–13, 15, 19, 175, 177
ziyādah, 100, 118n, 130
hadith critics, criticism
and ʿilal al-ḥadīth, 152
and the qarāʾin school, 163–4
and the ẓāhir al-isnād school, 151–60, 164–5
decline of, 152
in the modern Levant, 151
recent Muslim return to, 5
summary of, 5
under the Ottomans, 152–3, 164–5
Hadith folk see Traditionalists
Haider, Najam
on the demarcation of Shiʿis, 195, 208
Ḥafṣ ibn Ghiyāth
and fard and munkar, 112
Ḥajjāj ibn Muḥammad, 29, 31
Ḥajjāj ibn Yūsuf, al-
involvement in ʿAbd al-Malik’s Qurʾān 
project, 16–19
Ḥākim al-Nīsabūrī, al-, 73–4, 83
Mustadrak, 109
on ʿAbd Allāh ibn Salamah, 109
on Abū Isḥāq, 107
on al-Zuhrī, 107
on ʿAmr ibn Dīnār, 107
on Hishām ibn ʿUrwah, 107
on madār, 107
on matn criticism, 130
on shādhdh, 105
on Shuʿbah, 108
on Sufyān al-Thawrī, 107–8
on Yaḥyá ibn Saʿīd al-Anṣārī, 107
Ḥakīm al-Tirmidhī, al- 77
as a Traditionalist, 94n
Hakkı, İzmirli İsmail
and Turkish hadith studies, 173
Ḥallāj, al-Ḥusayn ibn Manṣūr al-, 75
Hallaq, Wael
on Western and Muslim Hadith 
scholarship, 143
Hamdan, Omar
on ʿAbd al-Malik’s Qurʾān project, 16
Ḥammād ibn Salamah, 100, 103, 124n
Ḥanābilah see Ḥanbalīs
Ḥanafīs/Ḥanafism, 133
and Ibn al-Mubārak, 56–7
and matn criticism, 143
and the Kufan school, 57
in Marw, 66n
on akhbār al-āḥād, 132, 137–8
on ḥadīth al-muṣarrāh, 140
on hadith contradicting ijmāʿ, 136–7
on hadith contradicting inherited tradition, 
140
on hadith contradicting qiyās, 138–40
on hadith contradicting sunnah mashhūrah, 
136
on hadith contradicting the Qurʾān,  
133–6
on mutawātir, 136
on Sunnah, 137
response to al-Shāfiʿī on hadith, 135
Ḥanbalīs/Ḥanbalīsm, 133
and hadith specialists, 75
and matn criticism, 143
and Sufism, 77
on akhbār al-āḥād, 132
on ʿamal, 141
on hadith contradicting ijmāʿ, 137
on hadith contradicting qiyās, 138
on hadith contradicting the Qurʾān, 133
on Ibn al-Mubārak and Abū Ḥanīfah, 57
on Ibn al-Mubārak and Sufyān, 57
on rejecting unreasonable hadith, 142
on tawakkul, 58
Ḥanẓalah, 1
Haramī ibn ʿAbd Allāh, al-
madār, 111
Hārūn ibn ʿAbd Allāh, 29
Ḥasan al-Bannā, 154–5
Ḥasan al-Baṣrī, al-, 94n, 108
alleged introduction of basmalah into 
Qurʾān, 24n
aversion to awrād, 16
Ḥasan al-Saqqāf, 160
Ḥasan ibn Sufyān al-Nasawī, al- 61
Ḥasan ibn Yazīd al-Kūfī, 108

 220 ] 
Index
Hatiboğlu, Mehmed Said
and ‘Critical Islamic thought’, 176
and the school of Ankara, 182
criticism of Hurgronje, 176
criticism of Schacht, 176
dissertation, 176
supervised by Okiç, 174
on Caetani, 176
on Duncan Black Macdonald, 176
on fitan hadiths, 176
on Goldziher, 176, 182
Western influence on, 186
Haythamī, Abū Bakr al-
on madār, 110
Ḥibbān ibn Mūsā al-Marwazī, 56, 61
Hishām ibn ʿAbd al-Malik
and al-Zuhrī, 11–12
hadith codification initiative, 11–12, 15–16
Hishām ibn Khālid al-Salāmī, 14
Horovitz, Josef
criticism by Okiç, 174
on the Jewish origin of the isnād system, 
174
Turkish reception of, 178
Ḥulw, Muḥammad ʿAlī al-
on al-Suyūṭī, 211n
on the evolution of hadith scholarship 
among Sunnis and Shiʿis, 197–8
Ḥumayd al-Ṭawīl, 109
Hurgronje, Snouck, 176
Hurvitz, Nimrod
on zuhd, 53
Ḥusayn ibn al-Ḥasan, al-, 50–1, 53, 58, 61–3, 
69n
Hushaym ibn Bashīr
and fard and munkar, 112
Ibn ʿAbbās, 111, 140
Ibn ʿAbd al-Barr
as a traditionalist Mālikī, 131
on ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Isḥāq al-Wāsiṭī, 111
on madār, 109, 111
Ibn Abī ʿĀṣim, 53
Ibn Abī Ḥātim al-Rāzī, 50, 53, 59–60
on al-jarḥ wa-al-taʿdīl, 104
Ibn Abī Khaythamah, 11–13, 15, 22n
Ibn Abī Shaybah, Abū Bakr, 29, 44–5
Ibn ʿAdī al-Qaṭṭān
on Abū al-ʿĀliyah, 108
on Abū al-Miqdām ʿAmr ibn Thābit al-
Kūfī, 101
on gharīb, 101
on Ismāʿīl ibn Rajāʾ al-Zabīdī, 108
on madār, 108, 111
on Saʿd ibn Saʿīd ibn Qays al-Anṣārī, 111
Ibn al-Aʿrābī, Abū Saʿīd Aḥmad ibn 
Muhammad ibn Ziyād, 72–3, 75–6, 78, 
81–3, 85, 90n
as chief scholar of Mecca, 73
biography and works, 73
Ibn al-Ḥājib
on Hadith contradicting qiyās, 139
Ibn al-Humām
on Hadith contradicting qiyās, 139
Ibn al-Jawzī, 74, 129, 143
Ibn al-Madīnī, ʿAlī, 72
on Abū Isḥāq, 107
on al-Aʿmash, 107
on al-Zuhrī, 107
on ʿAmr ibn Dīnār, 107
on comparing Hadith transmissions, 103
on madār, 107
on Qatādah, 107
on Yaḥyá ibn Abī Kathīr, 107
Ibn al-Mubārak, 83
agreement with Traditionalists, 57
and Abū Ḥanīfah, 49–50, 56–7
and heretics, 59–60
and Isrāʾīlīyāt, 53–4
and jihād, 52
and Mālik, 50
and shift from qitāl and siyar to jihād due to 
renunciant piety, 52
and Sufism, 49–50, 53, 58–9
and Sufyān al-Thawrī, 50, 55, 57
and tafsīr, 60
and tawakkul, 54, 57–9
and the Khawārij, 59
and the Murjiʾah, 59
and the Qadarīyah, 59–60
and the Sermon on the Mount, 58–9
and the Shīʿah, 59–60
and zuhd, 57–9
as a jurist, 56–7
as a merchant, 54
as a traditionist, 54
authorship and works, 55, 60–3
collection of doctrine mainly in Marw, 56–7
disagreement with Rationalists, 57
Kitāb al-Birr, 49–53, 60–1
Kitāb al-Jihād, 49–53, 55
Kitāb al-Zuhd, 49–55, 57–63
modern Arabic research on, 49
Musnad, 49–50, 53, 55, 61
on ʿAmr ibn Thābit, 60
recension of Kitāb al-Zuhd by al-Ḥusayn ibn 
al-Ḥasan, 50–1, 53, 58, 61–3, 69n
recension of Kitāb al-Zuhd by Ibn Ṣāʿid, 63n
recension of Kitāb al-Zuhd by Nuʿaym ibn 
Ḥammād, 58, 61–3
regions of sources, 54–5, 63
teachers and sources of, 54–6, 63
transmission from sectaries and heretics, 60
weaknesses in modern Arabic study of, 
49–51
year of birth, 50

  
Index 
[ 221
Ibn al-Mulaqqin
on madār, 110
Ibn al-Nadīm, 56, 60
on Zaydī Hadith transmitters, 202
Ibn al-Qaṭṭān al-Fāsī
on tafarrud al-thiqah, 105
Ibn al-Rāwandī, 58
Ibn al-Ṣalāḥ
as a developer of theory of Hadith science, 
143
on fard, 102, 105–6
on gharīb, 102
on mutābiʿāt, 104
on shawāhid, 104–6
Western study of, 4
Ibn al-Sharqī, Abū Ḥāmid, 83
Ibn al-Turkumānī
on Abān ibn Abī ʿAyyāsh, 110
on al-Aʿmash, 110
on al-Haramī, 111
on madār, 110
Ibn al-Zubayr, ʿAbd Allāh, 175–6
Ibn ʿAqīl
as a Ḥanbalī rationalist, 131
Ibn ʿAqīl, Muḥammad al-ʿAlawī
and Rashīd Riḍā, 199
and Zaydī authorities, 201–2, 207
as a polemicist, 202
criticism of Ibn Ḥajar, 199–201, 206
life and career, 199
on al-Dhahabī, 199, 206
on Ṣāliḥ ibn Mahdī al-Maqbal, 202
on Shiʿi Hadith transmitters in Sunni 
scholarship, 199, 207
Ibn ʿAsākir, 15–16
Ibn ʿAwn, ʿAbd Allāh, 66n
Ibn Bābawayh, 29
Ibn Ḥajar al-ʿAsqalānī, 49, 41, 51, 60–1, 72, 74, 
131, 158–9, 162, 193
and al-ʿIrāqī, 160
as a developer of theory of Hadith science, 
143, 159
commentary on adhān hadith, 35–6
on Abū Janāb al-Kalbī, 111
on fard, 102
on gharīb, 102
on Ibn Nāṣir al-Dīn, 166n
on Ibrāhīm ibn Yaʿqūb al-Jūzajānī, 203
on madār, 110–11
on Shiʿism, 194, 199–201, 206
Ibn Ḥazm al-Andalusī
on tafarrud al-thiqah, 105
Ibn Ḥibbān al-Bustī, 29
on iʿtibār, 103
on Shiʿi Hadith transmitters, 205
Ibn Hishām, 29
Ibn Isḥāq, 44
Ibn Jurayj, 29, 44
Ibn Khafīf al-Shīrāzī, Abū ʿAbd Allāh 
Muḥammad, 76
Ibn Khayr al-Ishbīlī, 61, 73
Ibn Khuzaymah, 29, 78, 83
Ibn Lahīʿah, 53, 60, 63
accused of Shiʿism, 60
Ibn Mājah, 28–9, 83
Ibn Mandah, Abū ʿAbd Allāh Muḥammad,  
83
on gharīb, 113
on gharīb of al-Zuhrī, 113
on gharīb of Qatādah, 113
Ibn Masrūq al-Ṭūsī, Abū al-ʿAbbās Aḥmad 
ibn Muḥammad, 72
Ibn Masʿūd, ʿAbd Allāh, 108, 111
Ibn Nāṣir al-Dīn al-Dimashqī
as a hadith critic, 152
Ibn Nujayd, Abū ʿAmr Ismāʿīl, 72
as a traditionist, 74
biography and works, 74
Ibn Qayyim al-Jawzīyah, 129, 143
on ʿamal, 141
Ibn Rajab al-Ḥanbalī
on hadith criticism, 105
Ibn Saʿd, 11, 14, 29
Ibn Ṣāʿid, 63n
Ibn Sīrīn, Muḥammad, 16–17, 103
Ibn Ṭāhir al-Sulamī, 53
Ibn Taymīyah
on ʿamal, 141
on ijmāʿ, 137
Ibn Ṭūlūn, 166n
as a hadith critic, 152
on Ibn Zurayq, 166n
Ibn ʿUmar, 1, 28–9, 100, 118n, 141
Ibn Zurayq, 166n
as a hadith critic, 152
Ibrahīm, Majdī Fatḥī al-Sayyid, 73
Ibrāhīm al-Nakhaʿī, 108
aversion to ʿAbd al-Malik’s Qurʾān project, 
16–17
aversion to kitāb from the time of ʿAbd al-
Malik, 15–17
Ibrāhīm ibn ʿAbd Allāh al-Khallāl, 61
Ibrāhīm ibn Adham, 59
Ibrāhīm ibn Abī Yaḥyá
as a madār, 109
Ibrāhīm ibn al-Mundhir, 13–14
Ibrāhīm ibn Muslim al-Hajarī, 111
Ibrāhīm ibn Saʿd
suspicious transmissions from al-Zuhrī,  
14
Imām al-Ḥaramayn al-Juwaynī
on hadith contradicting the practice of 
Companions, 141–2
on mutawātir hadith contradicting ijmāʿ, 
137
ʿImrān ibn Ḥuṣayn, 110

 222 ] 
Index
ʿIrāqī, al-, 160
ʿĪsá al-Ayyūbī, 50, 64n
ʿĪsá ibn Abān
on hadith contradicting inherited tradition, 
140
on hadith contradicting qiyās, 139
response to al-Shāfiʿī, 135
ʿĪsá ibn Yūnus, 2
Isḥāq ibn Rāhūyah/Rāhawayh, 51, 57, 83
Islamic law
development of Western scholarship on, 4
Ismāʿīl ibn al-Ḥusayn al-Maḥāmilī, al-Qāḍī, 
74, 83
Ismāʿīl ibn Khālid al-Aḥmasī, 101
Ismāʿīl ibn Rajāʾ al-Zabīdī
as a madār, 108
isnāds
and classical Hadith scholarship, 178–9
and Sufism, 75–8
definition of, 1
English abbreviations of, 1
fabrication of, 2
in tandem with other methods, 20–1
isnād-cum-matn analysis
Pavlovitch’s criticism of, 4
ʿItr, Nūr al-Dīn
and al-Albānī, 152, 160
as a modern Hadith critic, 151, 161
Jābir ibn ʿAbd Allāh al-Anṣārī, 111
Jābir ibn Yazīd al-Juʿfī 
as a madār, 109
Jamāl, Muḥammad ʿUthmān, 49
Jarīr ibn ʿAbd al-Ḥamīd, 102
Jarrar, Maher, 195
Jarrār, Nabīl Saʿd al-, 73
Jaṣṣāṣ al-Rāzī, al-, 56
on Hadith contradicting ijmāʿ, 137
Jazāʾirī, Ṭāhir al-
and revival of hadith sciences, 152, 164
jihād al-akbar, al-, 53
jizyah, 24n
Junayd, Abū al-Qāsim al-, 77, 94n
and Ibn al-Aʿrābī, 76
and Ibn Masrūq, 72, 77
and Jaʿfar al-Khuldī, 73, 78
appearance in dream, 72
Jūraqānī, al-, 143
Juynboll, Gautier H. A.
in Turkish scholarship, 179
on common links, 5, 98, 113
on ‘diving’ strands, 98
on madār, 98
on single stands, 98
on the authenticity of hadith, 3, 46n
on the authenticity of Prophetical taxation 
provisions, 13
Turkish reception of, 178
versus Muslim scholarship on common 
links, 114–15
Juwaynī, al- see Imām al-Ḥaramayn
Kandemir, Yaşar
as a leader of Turkish Traditionalism, 181
career and approach, 191n
on the reliability of the Ṣaḥīḥayn, 181
Karamustafa, Ahmet
on Abū al-Ḥasan ʿAlī ibn Jahḍam al-
Hamadhānī, 76
on traditionist Sufism, 72, 76, 78
Khadījah Muḥammad Kāmil, 73
Khalāf Maḥmūd ʿAbd al-Samīʿ, 74
Khālid al-Ḥadhdhāʾ, 34–5
Khālid ibn Maʿdān, 2
Khālid ibn Makhlad al-Qazwīnī
and Shiʿism, 204
Khallāl, al-, 58–9
kharāj, 24n
Khārijīs, 59, 193, 199
Khaṭīb al-Baghdādī, al-, 50, 72–4, 80
on hadith contradicting ijmāʿ, 137
on matn criticism, 130
on negative judgements of early hadith 
critics, 104–5
on raʾy, 133
on rejecting unreasonable hadith, 133
Khoury, Raif Georges, 51
Khuldī, Abū Muḥammad Jaʿfar ibn 
Muḥammad ibn Nuṣayr al-, 72
biography and works, 73
Khuzaymah ibn Thābit al-Anṣārī, 111
Kinberg, Leah, 53
Kırbaşoğlu, Hayri, 181
Kister, Meir
on al-Zuhrī hadith as pro-mawālī, 18
on al-Zuhrī versus Umayyads, 11
Turkish reception of, 178
Knysh, Alexander, 73
Koçyiğit, Talât
and Robson, 175
career and influence, 186n
criticism of Goldziher, 175
criticism of Schacht, 186n
on Orientalists, 175
on Western hadith scholarship, 182
Krackowsky, 174
Krymskiy, 174
Kuzudişli, Bekir
criticism of Schacht, 178
Lammens, Henri, 176, 188n
MacDonald, Duncan, 176
on al-Ghazālī, 76
Madelung, Wilferd, 208
Maḥmūd ibn Ghaylān, 29, 31

  
Index 
[ 223
Maḥmūd Shukrī al-Ālūsī, 155
Mālik ibn Anas, 22n, 29, 44–5, 51, 58, 63, 118n, 
181
as a madār, 107
inadmissibility of his gharīb, 113
on hadith contradicting ʿamal, 141
ziyādah on Nāfiʿ, 100
Mālikīs/Mālikism, 51, 133
and ʿamal, 140–1, 150n
and matn criticism, 143
on akhbār al-āḥād, 132
on hadith contradicting ijmāʿ, 136–7
on hadith contradicting qiyās, 138–40
on hadith contradicting the Qurʾān, 133, 
136
Mallībārī, Ḥamzah al-
and hadith criticism, 163
and the Jordanian hadith movement, 165
and the qarāʾin school, 163–5
as a modern hadith critic, 152
as a Salafi, 163
career, 163
criticism of al-Albānī, 163–4
criticism of ẓāhir al-isnād, 163–4
Maʿmar ibn Rāshid, 54–5, 60, 181
and hadith about ʿAlī’s Nabatean heritage, 
25n
and the Umayyads, 10
arrival in Yemen, 26n
criticism of, 161
criticism of al-Zuhrī, 21n
possible anti-Umayyad interpolator of al-
Zuhrī hadith, 10
possible interpolator of al-Zuhrī’s anti-kitāb 
hadith, 20
possible pro-mawālī interpolator of al-Zuhrī 
hadith, 19–20
al-Maʾmūn, 19, 58
Inquisition, 193
Maʿn ibn ʿĪsá, 13
Maqbal, Ṣāliḥ ibn Mahdī al-
on Shiʿi hadith transmitters in Sunni 
scholarship, 202
Massignon, Louis
on al-Ḥallāj, 75
on Sufism and Hadith, 75
matn
and hadith criticism, 130–1
and juristic criticism, 142–3
and Muslim scholarship, 129, 142
and Western scholarship, 129
definition of, 1
mawālī, 18
role in Islamic learning, 25n
their struggle for equality in the domain of 
hadith, 9–10, 20
ʿUmar II’s support for, 18–20
Umayyad restrictions upon, 18, 24–5n
Melchert, Christopher
approach to Shiʿism, 208
Farrell’s criticisms of, 71, 77, 93n
on al-Nasāʾī as a Shiʿi, 208
on Ibn al-Aʿrābī, 76
on Hadith and Sufism, 70–1, 78
study of sectarian hadith transmitters, 193–4
Mizzī, al-, 13, 60, 74, 78
Modarressi, Hossein
on early Shiʿi literature, 194
Mottahedeh, Roy, 70
Motzki, Harald, 4
critic of Azami, 8n
in Turkish scholarship, 179
less sceptical than Schacht and Juynboll, 8n
on the importance of assumptions, 3
response to Schacht, 3
Turkish reception of, 178
Muʿāwiyah, 175
Mughīrah ibn Shuʿbah, al-, 108–9, 175
Muḥammad al-Bāqir
and hadith contradicting the Qurʾān, 134
Muḥammad ʿAwwāmah
as a modern hadith critic, 151
Muḥammad ibn ʿAbd Allāh ibn Muslim, 14
bad reputation, 23n
mutābiʿāt from al-Zuhrī, 14
questionable attendance of al-Zuhrī’s 
lessons, 14
Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥasan al-Baṣrī, 2
Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥusayn al-Burjulānī, 77
Muḥammad ibn al-Zubayr al-Ḥanẓalī
as a madār, 110
Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm al-Taymī, 107
Muḥammad ibn Manṣūr al-Ṭūsī, 77
Muḥammad ibn Naṣr al-Marwazī, 57
Muḥāsibī, al-Ḥārith ibn Asad al-, 72
Muqbil ibn Hādī al-Wādiʿī, 159
Mūsawī, ʿAbd al-Ḥusayn Sharaf al-Dīn al-
and Salīm al-Bishrī, 196–7
on Shiʿi transmitters in Sunni hadith 
collections, 196
Muslim ibn al-Ḥajjāj, 28–32, 34, 55, 83–4, 100
and mutābiʿāt and shawāhid, 104
canonisation of his Ṣaḥīḥ, 71, 80
selection and categorisation in his Ṣaḥīḥ, 
104
on Ghaylān conversion hadith, 161
on hadith criticism, 113
on ziyādah, 130
Muṣṭafá al-ʿAdawī, 159
Muṣṭafá al-Sibāʿī, 154
Muṣṭafá ʿUthmān Muḥammad, 61
Muʿtamir ibn Sulaymān, 57
Muʿtazilīs, Muʿtazilah, 132
and hadith, 181
and Sufism, 58
on hadith contradicting qiyās, 139

 224 ] 
Index
Nāfiʿ, 29, 118n
Nasāʾī, al-. 29, 83
as a Shiʿi, 192, 208, 209n
recording of contradictory hadith, 3
Nāṣibīs, 199, 203
Nawawī, al- 49
on madār, 110
non-Muslims under Muslim rule, 40
Nuʿaym ibn Ḥammād, 58, 61–3
Nūḥ ibn Darrāj, 101
Nuʿmān, al-, 29
Okiç, Muhammed Tayyib
and Hatiboğlu, 174
and Koçyiğit, 174
criticism of Caetani, 174
criticism of Horovitz, 174
criticism of Lammens, 174
education and career, 174
on al-Zuhrī, 175–6
on Orientalists and Hadith, 174–6
on Sezgin, 174, 177
Orientalists, Orientalism
on hadith, 174–9, 181–2
Orfali, Bilal, 74
Özafşar, Mehmet Emin, 181
Özkan, Halit, 115–16
criticism of Juynboll, 98–9
on madār, 98–9, 109
on common links, 98–9
poetry
and Sufism, 72
pious hostility towards, 1–2
Prophet
on taxation, 13
Pseudo-al-Nāshiʾ al-Akbar
and the delineation of Shiʿism, 195, 206
Qāḍī ʿIyāḍ, al-
on ʿamal, 141
on selection and categorisation in Muslim’s 
Ṣaḥīḥ, 104
Qarāfī, al-
on hadith contradicting qiyās, 139
Qāsimī, Jamāl al-Dīn al-, 155
and revival of hadith sciences, 152, 164
Qatādah ibn Diʿāmah, 108
as a madār, 107
aversion to ʿAbd al-Malik’s Qurʾān project, 
16–17
aversion to kitāb, 16–17
Qays ibn Rabīʿ, al-
as a madār, 109
Qurʾān
and Abū Bakr, 12
and ʿAbd al-Malik and al-Ḥajjāj, 16–17, 
19–20, 24n
and the introduction of basmalah, 24n
and ʿUthmān, 12, 20
arrangement (taʾlīf) of sūrahs in, 16–17
early controversy over awrād, 16–17
early controversy over diacritics (naqṭ) in, 
16–17, 19
transformation from ritual object to source 
of law, 17–18
Qushayrī, al-, 50, 76
Radtke, Bernd
on al-Rūdhbārī’s lectures, 74
Rāfiʿ ibn Khadīj, 110
Rahman, Fazlur
in Turkish scholarship, 180
Ramaḍān, Saʿīd, 154
Rastagār, Parviz
engagement with Imāmī literature, 199
Rationalists, Rationalism
versus Traditionalists on akhbār al-āḥād, 132
Reinert, Benedikt, 58
Riḍā, Muḥammad Rashīd, 154
riwāyah bi-al-lafẓ, al-
hadith implicitly supporting, 13
rare, 31
Ritter, Hellmut
and Sezgin, 177
Robson, James, 175
Turkish reception of, 178
Rūdhbārī, Abū ʿAbd Allāh Aḥmad ibn ʿAṭāʾ 
al-, 72
biography, 74
Rūdhbārī, Abū ʿAlī al-, 74
Sābiq, Sayyid, 155
Saʿd ibn Saʿīd ibn Qays al-Anṣārī
as a madār, 108, 111
Saʿīd, Hammām
and the Jordanian Hadith movement, 163, 
165
and the qarāʾin school, 164–5
as a modern Hadith critic, 152
critical edition of Ibn Rajab Sharḥ ʿIlal, 163
Saʿīd ibn Bashīr, 14
Saʿīd ibn Ziyād
obscurity of, 13, 23n
Salafism
and madhhabī Traditionalism, 160–2
and rise in interest in hadith, 165
and Sufism, 160–1
and ẓāhir al-isnād, 165
Ṣalāḥ al-Dīn al-ʿAlāʾī, 72
Salem, Feryal, 52–4
Sālim, 1
Salmān, 67n
Sāmarrāʾī, Ṣubḥī al-Badrī al-, 61, 69n
Sarakhsī, al-, 56
on hadith contradicting qiyās, 139

  
Index 
[ 225
Sarī al-Saqaṭī, al-, 72
Savant, Sarah
on the limits of Muslim reworking of 
historical memory, 42
Ṣayrafī al-Shāfiʿī, Abū Bakr Muḥammad ibn 
ʿAbd Allāh al-, 83
on ʿamal, 141
Schacht, Joseph
criticism by Koçyiğit, 186n
criticism by Kuzudişli, 178
Muslim discomfort with, 6
Muslim response to, 3
on common links, 97–8
on hadith authenticity, 3
on spread of isnāds, 98
Turkish reception of, 178
Turkish translation of, 177
versus Muslim scholarship on common 
links, 114–15
vindication by Pavlovitch on spreading 
isnāds, 22n
Schoeler, Gregor, 51
on al-Zuhrī and the writing of Hadith, 10
on Maʿmar interpolating a hadith from 
al-Zuhrī, 10
on the nature of early Islamic books, 52–3
on ʿUmar II’s Hadith project echoing 
earlier Qurʾān projects, 12
Turkish reception of, 178
Şentürk, Recep
on Ibn al-Aʿrābī, 75, 78
on hadith transmission networks, 79–80, 82
on Sufism and hadith, 75, 78
on the canonisation of the Ṣaḥīḥayn, 80 
Sezgin, Fuat, 61, 68–9n
and Okiç, 174
and Ritter, 177
and the Faculty of Theology, Ankara, 177
and Turkish military coup, 177
criticism of Goldziher, 177
on the writing of Hadith, 177
Shāfiʿī, al-, 51, 57, 105, 122n
acceptance of Mālik’s ziyādah, 100
date of his Risālah, 22n
influence on Islamic legal theory, 135, 150n
on ʿamal, 141
on hadith, 134–5
on ijmāʿ contradicting Sunnah, 137
on munkar, 105–6
on shādhdh, 105–6
on Sunnah, 134–5
response to Abū Yūsuf, 134
theory of Qurʾān and Sunnah, 22n
Shāfiʿīs, Shāfiʿism, 133
and matn criticism, 143
on akhbār al-āḥād, 132
on ʿamal, 141
on hadith contradicting ijmāʿ, 137
on hadith contradicting qiyās, 138
on hadith contradicting the Qurʾān, 133
on qiyās, 139
on rejecting unreasonable hadith, 132–3, 142
on Sufism, 76
Shaqīq al-Balkhī, 58–9
Shāṭibī, al-
on hadith contradicting qiyās, 139
Shiʿis, Shiʿism
ʿAlid rebellions, 193, 195
and Imāmī scholarship, 196
and the adhān, 32
hadith transmitters, 192–3
in Sunni hadith collections, 192–4
rebellions against Umayyads and 
Abbasids, 192
Western scholarship on Shiʿi Hadith 
transmitters, 193–6
Shuʿayb al-Arnaʾūṭ, 151
Shuʿbah ibn al-Ḥajjāj, 1, 26n, 57
as a madār, 108
on hadith criticism, 104, 113
shuʿūbīyah, 19, 25n
Sibṭ ibn al-ʿAjamī, 152
Sobieroj, Florian, 76
Sprenger, Aloys, 174, 176 
Sūdānī, Karīmah, 204
Suddī, al-, 108
Sufism, 58
and hadith, 75
and hadith specialists, 70–1, 76, 82
and isnāds, 75–8
and opposition to hadith, 74, 76
and the Ḥanbalis, 75, 77
inward moral attitude, 71
Sufyān al-Thawrī, 50–1, 55–9, 63
and ʿAbd Allāh ibn ʿAwn, 66n
and Ayyūb al-Sakhtiyānī, 66n
and Kufan Shiʿism, 66n
and rationalism, 66n
and the Basran school, 66n
and the Kufan school, 57
as a madār, 107–8
Sufyān ibn ʿAbd al-Malik, 56
Sufyān ibn ʿUyaynah, 15, 59, 83, 111
al-Sulamī, Abū ʿAbd al-Raḥmān, 71–2, 74–7, 
80, 82, 88n, 91n
Sulaymān ibn Arqam
as a madār, 110
Sulaymān ibn ʿAbd al-Malik
not associated with a hadith project, 16
Sulaymān ibn Ṭarkhān al-Taymī, 61
Sulṭān al-ʿAkāylah
as a student of Hammām Saʿīd, 163
Sunnah
as revelation, 22n
authority equal to Qurʾān, 12
in the thinking of al-Shāfiʿī, 22n

 226 ] 
Index
Sunnis, Sunnism
and anti-ʿAlid trends, 199
and hadith transmission, 70
and Muʿtazilīs, 132
and Shiʿi hadith transmitters, 192–4, 199–206
and Shiʿism, 59
and Sufism, 70
and philosophers, 132
authoritative collections, 2
pro-ʿAlid Sunnis, 192
self-definition, 132
Sunni consensus, 133
theology, 2
view of history, 51–2
Suyūṭī, al-, 61, 153
on fabricated hadith, 211n
Ṭabarānī, Abū al-Qāsim al-, 73, 78, 83
Ṭabarī, al-, 175
Ṭabasī, Muḥammad Jaʿfar al-
and the distinction between Imāmism and 
Shiʿism, 198
on Shiʿi transmitters in Sunni hadith 
collections, 197, 210n
Ṭaḥāwī, al-
as a traditionalist Ḥanafī, 131
Takim, Liyakatali
on Imāmī narrators, 194–5
Ṭayālisī, al-, 29, 57, 83
Tilimsānī, al-
on hadith contradicting qiyās, 139
Topgül, Muhammad Enes
and al-Ṭabasī, 205
and Imāmī biographical literature, 206
and Mūsawī, 205
on Shiʿi hadith transmitters in Sunni 
scholarship, 205–7
on the delineation of Shiʿism, 205–6
traditionists
and common links, 97
and Sufism 70–82
as ḥuffāẓ, 72
English meaning of, 1
Traditionalists, Traditionalism, 131
hegemony in hadith, 181
summary of, 5
versus jurisprudents on hadith, 5
versus rationalists on akhbār al-āḥād, 132
Tirmidhī, al-, 28–30, 51, 55–6
and gharīb, 99–101
on ziyādah, 130
Turkey
and Faculties of Theology, 172–3, 184n
and hadith, 6, 171–83
and hadith debates, 173, 177, 179–83
and Westernisation, 171–2, 182–3, 185n
under the Ottomans, 171–2
under the Republic, 172–4, 182
Turkish Modernists/Modernism
and Hatiboğlu, 176–7
and Kırbaşoğlu, 181
and Orientalists on hadith, 179, 181
and the Sunnah, 180
and Western hadith studies, 182–3
based in Ankara, 179, 186n
criticism of the Ṣaḥīḥayn, 181
name of, 190n
on hadith, 180–1
versus Traditionalists, 179–80, 182
Turkish Qurʾānists/Qurʾānism (Kur’ancılar), 
180
and Edip Yüksel, 190–1n
on Sunnah, 180
Turkish Traditionalists, Traditionalism, 173
based in Istanbul, 173
name of, 190n
on ‘historicalists’, 179
on prophetic medicine, 180
on the authority of the Sunnah, 180
on the Faculty of Theology in Ankara,  
186n
versus Modernists, 179–80, 182
ʿUbayd Allāh ibn Mūsá, 1
ʿUbayd Allāh ibn Walīd al-Waṣṣāfī, 109
Ugan, Zakir Kadiri
and Islamic modernists, 173
and Orientalists on Hadith, 173–4, 182–3
and Turkish hadith studies, 173
on Abū Hurayrah, 174
on Goldziher, 174
on the Companions, 173–4
ʿUrwah ibn al-Zubayr, 108
ʿUmar (II) ibn ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz
and al-Zuhrī, 11
hadith codification initiative, 11–12, 15–16
policy on mawālī, 18–20, 25n
similarities between his hadith project and 
earlier Qurʾān projects, 12
ʿUmar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb, 107
family of, 13, 22n
role in creation of adhān, 28, 31–2, 36, 44
ʿUmar ibn Thābit al-Anṣārī, 108
ʿUmārah ibn Khuzaymah, 111
Umayyads, 9–11, 13, 15–20, 21n, 25n, 32, 94n, 
175–6, 187n, 192, 197, 199–200
and al-Zuhrī, 10, 21n, 175–6
and mawālī, 18, 24–5n
and the Qurʾān, 16–18
and the writing of hadith, 9, 11, 13, 15, 19
and ʿUmar’s sunnah, 46n
ʿUqayl ibn Khālid, 13
possession of al-Zuhrī book, 22n
preference for transmission from memory 
(ḥifẓ), 22n
uṣūl al-fiqh

  
Index 
[ 227
and hadith criticism, 129
initial Western focus on, 4
ʿUthmān al-Nahdī, 109
ʿUthmān ibn ʿAffān
abolition of tower houses, 35
modification of adhān, 32, 46n
Qurʾān project, 12, 20
ʿUthmān ibn ʿAṭāʾ al-Khurāsānī, 108
van Arendonk, Cornelis
on the Zaydī Imāmate in Yemen, 195
van Ess, Joseph
and Pseudo-al-Nāshiʾ al-Akbar, 195
on Shiʿi hadith transmitters, 195
on the demarcation of Shiʿis, 208
versus Madelung, 208
Wahb ibn Munabbih, 54
Wahb ibn Zamʿah, 56
Wakīʿ ibn al-Jarrāḥ
on zuhd, 67n
al-Walīd ibn ʿAbd al-Malik
not associated with a hadith project, 16
al-Walīd ibn Muslim, 14
problems with transmission from al-Zuhrī, 
15
Wāqidī, al-14
Watt, William Montgomery
Turkish translation of, 177
Wellhausen, Julius
Turkish translation of, 177
Yaḥyá ibn Abī Kathīr
as a madār, 107
Yaḥyā ibn Maʿīn, 83
on Abū Qudāmah Ḥārith ibn ʿUbayd al-
Iyādī, 109
on gharīb, 101
on Nūḥ ibn Darrāj, 101
Yaḥyā ibn Saʿīd al-Qaṭṭān, 83
Yaḥyá ibn Saʿīd ibn Qays al-Anṣārī, 101
as a madār, 107
Yaʿqūbī, al-, 175
Yüksel, Edip, 190–1n
Yūnus ibn Yazīd al-Aylī, 54–5
Yūsuf ibn Asbāṭ
on zuhd, 67n
zandaqah, 58
Zayd ibn al-Ḥawārī al-ʿAmmī
as a madār, 110
Zaydīs, Zaydism
and Sunni hadith, 207
and Sunnising, 202, 207
in Shiʿi scholarship, 207
in Sunni scholarship, 207
Zaylaʿī, al-
on madār, 110
Zuhrī, Ibn Shihāb al-, 44, 108
acquiescence in ʿAbd al-Malik’s Qurʾān 
project, 17
and ʿAbd al-Malik ibn Marwān, 15, 175–6
and the hadith of ʿUthmān’s Qurʾān 
project, 20
and the Umayyads, 9–20, 21n, 175–6
and trial topos, 13
as a madār, 107
false ascription of pro-mawālī hadith to,  
19
growth or retrojection of his isnad, 13
hostility towards mawālī, 18–20, 25n
negative reaction to al-Ḥajjāj and ʿAbd al-
Malik’s Qurʾān project, 10, 17–18
on the writing of hadith, 9, 175
pro-mawālī hadith, 9–10, 18
reinterpretation and reformulation of his 
anti-kitāb hadith, 20
whether he was coerced by Hishām, 12–13

 
 