
 Tafsīr al-Qurṭubī
Introduction

 Tafsīr al-Qurṭubī
The General Judgments of the Qur’an
and Clarification of what it contains of
the Sunnah and Āyahs of
Discrimination
INTRODUCTION
Abū ‘Abdullāh Muḥammad ibn
Aḥmad ibn Abī Bakr ibn Farḥ al-Anṣārī al-
Khazrajī al-Andalusī al-Qurṭubī
translated by
Aisha Bewley

 © Aisha Bewley 2018
Published by: Diwan Press Ltd.
Website: www.diwanpress.com
E-mail: info@diwanpress.com
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in any retrieval system or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise without the prior permission of the publishers.
By: Abu Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Qurtubi
Translated by: Aisha Abdarrahman Bewley
Edited by: Abdalhaqq Bewley
A catalogue record of this book is available from the British Library.
ISBN13: 978-1-908892-57-7 (Paperback)
978-1-908892-56-0 (Hardback)
978-1-908892-58-4 (Casebound)
978-1-908892-70-6 (ePub & Kindle)
Printed by: Lightning Source

 Contents
The general virtues of the Qur’an and encouragement to study it.
The excellence of the one who seeks it, recites it, listens to it and acts
by it. 6
How to recite the Book of Allah and what is disliked and forbidden
in respect of it, and people’s disagreement about that 11
Cautioning the people of the Qur’an and scholars against showing
off 17
What someone who knows the Qur’an must do and not neglect to do
20
The syntax of the Qur’an, learning it and studying it, and the reward
for the one who recites the Qur’an with proper inflections 23
What is reported about the excellence of tafsīr of the Qur’an and
those who do it 26
What is reported about the one who is a bearer of the Qur’an, who
he is and those who are hostile to him 27
The respect and esteem for the Qur’an which is mandatory for
someone who recites and bears the Qur’an 27
What is reported regarding threats against engaging in tafsīr of the
Qur’an by means of opinion (ra’y) or being bold in doing that, and
the ranks of the commentators 32
The Book being explained by the Sunnah, and what has been
transmitted about that 37
How to learn and understand the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of
His Prophet g, and what has been narrated about it being easier for
someone who used to act by it without memorising it 40
The meaning of the words of the Prophet g, “The Qur’an was
revealed in seven aḥruf (dialects/modes).” 42

 Section on the seven readings 46
Section: The hadith of ‘Umar and Hishām 47
The collection of the Qur’an and the reason ‘Uthmān had copies of
the Qur’an copied out and burned the rest. The memorisation of the
Qur’an by the Companions in the time of the Prophet g 49
Section 54
Section 55
What has come about the order of the sūrahs and āyahs of the Qur’an,
its vowelling and dots, its ḥizbs and tens, the number of its letters,
juz’s, words and āyahs 58
Section 61
Section 61
Section 62
Section 63
The meaning of the words sūrah, āyah, kalimah (word) and ḥarf (letter)
63
Does the Qur’an contain words which are not Arabic? 65
Points about the inimitability of the Qur’an, preconditions of the
miracle and its reality 66
Section 68
Information about hadiths forged about the excellence of the sūrahs
of the Qur’an and other matters 73
What has come on the refutation of those who attack the Qur’an and
oppose the text of ‘Uthmān by adding to it or removing some of it 75
Seeking Refuge with Allah from Shayṭān 78
The Basmalah 82

 
 
 Translator’s note
There are minor omissions in the text. Some poems have been omitted
which the author quotes to illustrate a point of grammatical usage or as an
example of orthography or the usage of a word, often a derivative of the
root of the word used in the āyah, but not the actual word used. Often it is
difficult to convey the sense in English. Occasionally the author explores a
grammatical matter or a tangential issue, and some of these may have been
shortened. English grammatical terms used to translate Arabic grammatical
terms do not have the exact same meaning, sometimes rendering an exact
translation of them problematic and often obscure.
The end of a juz’ may vary by an āyah or two in order to preserve relevant
passages.

 
 Page intentionally left blank

 W
Introduction
In the Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, Most Merciful
e seek His help and may Allah bless our master Muḥammad and his
family and Companions and grant them abundant peace. Thus
speaks the faqīh, imam of knowledge and action, the hadith scholar, Abū
‘Abdullāh Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad ibn Abī Bakr ibn Farḥ al-Anṣārī al-
Khazrajī al-Andalusī, then al-Qurṭubī:
Praise belongs to Allah who began by praising Himself before any praiser
praised Him! I testify that there is no god but Allah alone with no partner,
the Lord who is One and Self-Sustaining, the Living, Self-Subsistent Who
does not die, the Master of Majesty and Nobility and immense gifts, He
Who has spoken the Qur’an, He Who created the human being and blessed
him with faith and sent His Messenger Muḥammad g to make the message
clear. He sent him with the Clear Book, which distinguishes between doubt
and certainty, which eloquent men cannot oppose and intelligent men
cannot contradict. They cannot produce its like, even if they help one
another. He made its examples lessons for those who reflect on them and
His commands guidance for those who study them. In it He explains the
obligatory judgments and differentiates between the lawful and unlawful. In
it He repeats admonitions and stories for understanding and different types
of metaphors and reports about matters of the Unseen.
Allah Almighty says, ‘We have not omitted anything from the Book.’ (6:38) He
addresses it to His friends and they understand; and He explains to them
what He means in it and they grasp it. So those who recite the Qur’an bear
a concealed secret of Allah and guard His preserved knowledge. They are
the caliphs of His Prophets and His trustees, who are His people, elite and
chosen ones. The Messenger of Allah g said, ‘Allah has his own people
(ahlīn) among us.’ They asked, ‘Who are they, Messenger of Allah?’ He
replied, ‘They are the people of the Qur’an, the people of Allah and His
élite.’ Ibn Mājah transmitted it in the Sunan and Abū Bakr al-Bazzār in his
Musnad.
Anyone who knows the Book of Allah and remembers what has been
explained to him in it should be restrained by its prohibitions and fear
Allah, be mindful of Him and be ashamed before Him. He has taken on the
heavy responsibility of the Messengers and has become a witness at the

 Rising against any opponents among the people of other religions. Allah
Almighty said, ‘In this way We have made you a middlemost community, so that you
may act as witnesses against mankind.’ (2:143) The proof is against the one who
knows it and neglects it, rather than against the one who is lacking in it and
ignorant of it. If someone is given knowledge of the Qur’an and does not
benefit from it, is not constrained by its prohibitions and is not deterred by
it, and commits ugly sins and vile crimes, the Qur’an is an argument against
him. The Messenger of Allah g said, ‘The Qur’an is an argument either
for you or against you.’ Muslim transmitted it. Therefore it is obligatory for
anyone chosen by Allah to memorise His Book to have proper respect for it,
reflect on the truth of its words, understand its marvels and clarify what is
unusual in it. The Almighty says: ‘It is a Book We have sent down to you, full of
blessings, so let people of intelligence ponder its Signs’ (38:29) and ‘Will they not then
ponder the Qur’an or are there locks upon their hearts?’ (47:24) May Allah make us
among those who respect it properly, reflect on it deeply, implement its
justice, fulfil its conditions and do not seek guidance elsewhere! May He
guide us to its outward signs and radiant definitive judgments and by it
combine for us the best of this world and the Next! He is worthy to be
feared and entitled to forgive!
Then He gave to His Messenger clarification of what was unspecified,
explanation of what was difficult, and determination of what was probable,
so that, as well as conveying the Message, he g showed his special
competence regarding the Revelation which was entrusted to him. Allah
says: ‘And We have sent down the Reminder to you so that you can make clear to
mankind what has been sent down to them.’ (16:44) Then, after the Messenger of
Allah g the scholars were appointed to educe the meanings which it
indicates and to point out its principles in order that through ijtihād they
may reach the knowledge of what is meant. By that they are distinguished
from others and are singled out for reward on account of their efforts. Allah
Almighty says: ‘Allah will raise in rank those of you who believe and those who have
been given knowledge.’ (58:11) So the Book became the basis, the Sunnah its
clarification, and the deduction of the scholars its exposition and
elucidation. Praise be to Allah who has made our breasts the vessels of His
Book, our ears the springs of the Sunnah of His Prophet g, and our
aspirations directed to learning the Qur’an and investigating its meanings
and unusual words, and through that our seeking to please the Lord of the

 worlds and rise to knowledge of the dīn.
The Book of Allah is the source of all the sciences of the Sharī‘ah which
convey the Sunnah and the obligatory. It was brought down by the
Trustworthy One of heaven to the Trustworthy One of the earth. I thought
that I should devote myself to it for my entire life and devote my strength to
that cause by writing a brief commentary on it containing some points of
tafsīr, linguistics, grammar, and recitation, refutation of the people of
deviation and misguidance, as well as several hadiths which attest to what
we mention in it regarding judgments and the revelation of āyahs, thereby
combining the meanings of both and explaining what is abstruse in them
using the statements of the Salaf and those who followed them. I have done
this to remind myself and as a security for the day when I am buried, and as
a righteous action to continue beyond my death. Allah says: ‘On that Day man
will be told what he did and failed to do’ (75:13) and ‘Each self will know what it has
sent ahead and left behind.’ (82:15) The Prophet g said, ‘When a man dies, his
actions are cut off except for three — an ongoing ṣadaqah and knowledge
which brought benefit and a virtuous child who makes supplication for him.’
I intend in this book to attribute statements to their speakers and hadiths to
their compilers. It is said that part of the blessing of knowledge is to ascribe
a statement to its speaker. Many unattributed hadiths are reported in books
of tafsīr and fiqh and so the one who reads them does not know who
transmitted them. Therefore someone without information about that
remains confused and does not know the sound from the weak. It is a vast
science. Therefore he does not accept it as evidence until he knows the
person to whom it is ascribed among the famous imams and reliable
scholars of Islam. We have indicated some of that in this book. Allah is the
One Who grants success. I have only used those stories of commentators
and reports of historians that are necessary for clarification purposes and
also help to elucidate the āyahs which contain legal rulings so as to disclose
the full meaning and guide one to what is demanded by them. With every
āyah I have included whatever rulings it contains and other matters that we
will explain, when it contains reasons for its revelation, unusual commentary
and wisdoms. If it does not contain any legal judgement, I talk about its
interpretation.
The full title of this book is: The General Judgments of the Qur’an and
Clarification of what it contains of the Sunnah and āyahs of Discrimination.

 May Allah make it sincerely for His sake and grant me and my parents the
benefit of it. He hears the supplication and is quick to respond. Amen.

 The general virtues of the Qur’an and encouragement to study it.
The excellence of the one who seeks it, recites it, listens to it and
acts by it.
This topic is vast and scholars have written many books about it. We will
mention some points that point out the excellence of the Qur’an and what
Allah has prepared for its people when they are sincere for His sake and act
by it. The first aspect of the excellence of the Qur’an that the believer
should be aware of is that it is from the Lord of the worlds and is uncreated.
It consists of unparalleled words and has a quality which has no equivalent
or like. It comes from the Light of Allah’s Essence. Recitation of it is by the
voices of the reciters and their vocalisation. It is their acquisition and they
are commanded to do it as an obligation in certain acts of worship and it is
recommended at many times. They are reproved if they avoid it, and are
rewarded for doing it and punished for abandoning it. This is something
that the Muslims, the people of the Truth, agree on. Traditions state that
and well-known reports prove it.
Reward and punishment are only connected to what is part of what people
earn, as will be explained. Were it not that Allah had placed in the hearts of
His slaves the strength to bear it so that they can reflect on it, study it and
remember what it contains regarding obedience to Him, worship and
performing their duties and obligations, they would be too weak and would
collapse under its weight or perish. How could they bear it when Allah says,
‘Had We sent down this Qur’an onto a mountain, you would have seen it humbled,
crushed to pieces out of fear of Allah’ (59:21)? What is the strength of hearts
compared to that of the mountains? But Allah provided His slaves with the
strength to bear what He wishes as a favour and mercy from Him.
As for traditions about this topic, the first is what at-Tirmidhī transmitted
from Abū Sa‘īd that the Messenger of Allah g said, ‘The blessed and
exalted Lord said, “If anyone is distracted from asking Me by the Qur’an
and remembrance of Me, I will give him better than what I give to those
who ask.”’ He also said, ‘The excellence of the words of Allah over all other
words is like the excellence of Allah over His creation.’ He said that it is a
ḥasan gharīb hadith. Abū Muḥammad ad-Dārimī as-Samarqandī reported in
his Musnad that ‘Abdullāh said, ‘The seven long sūrahs are like the Torah.
The sūrahs with a hundred āyahs are like the Gospel, and the Mathānī is like

 the Zabūr. The rest of the Qur’an is excellent in itself.’
In at-Tirmidhī, al-Ḥārith reported that ‘Alī said, ‘I heard the Messenger of
Allah g say, “There will be trials like patches of dark night.” I asked,
“Messenger of Allah, how can one escape them?” He replied, “The Book of
Allah, blessed and exalted be He, contains your history, information about
what came before you, news about what will come after you and correct
judgment between you. It is decisive, not a jest. Allah will crush any tyrant
who abandons it and Allah will misguide whoever seeks guidance from
other than it. It is the Firm Rope of Allah, His Clear Light and the Wise
Reminder. It is the Straight Path. Passions are not misguided by it, tongues
do not become sated with it, and the godfearing do not become bored by it.
It does not wear out when it is recited a lot, and its wonders do not cease. It
is that which the jinn did not leave once they had heard it. They said, ‘We
heard a wonderful Qur’an which guides to right guidance.’ (72:1-2) Whoever knows it
has knowledge which takes precedence. Whoever utters it speaks the truth.
Whoever judges by it is just. Whoever acts by it is rewarded. Whoever calls
to it is guided to a straight path. Take it, O one-eyed.”’ (‘One-eyed’ referred
to al-Ḥārith). Ash-Sha‘bī accused al-Ḥārith of lying and of being of no
consequence. There are no evident lies from al-Ḥārith, but he is reproved
for his excessive love for ‘Alī and preferring him to anyone else. Allah knows
best, but this is why ash-Sha‘bī called him a liar, since he preferred Abū
Bakr and states that he was the first to become Muslim. Abū ‘Umar ibn
‘Abd al-Barr said, ‘I think that ash-Sha‘bī was punished for what he said
about al-Ḥārith al-Hamdānī being a liar.’
Abū Bakr Muḥammad ibn Bashshār ibn Muḥammad al-Anbārī, the
linguist and grammarian, says in his book, The Refutation of the One who
Opposes the Recension of ‘Uthman, transmitting from ‘Abdullāh ibn Mas‘ūd that
the Messenger of Allah g said, ‘This Qur’an is the Banquet of Allah. Learn
as much as you can from His Banquet. This Qur’an is the Rope of Allah,
and it is the Clear Light and Useful Healing. It is a protection for the one
who clings to it and a rescue for the one who follows it. It is not crooked and
so puts things straight. It does not stray so as to be blamed. Its wonders do
not cease. It does not wear out with much repetition. So recite it. Allah will
reward you with ten good deeds for every letter of its recitation. I do not say
that Alif-Lām-Mīm is a letter. Let me not find any of you placing his foot on
the other abandoning the recitation of Sūrat al-Baqarah. Shayṭān flees from

 a house in which Sūrat al-Baqarah is recited. The house most devoid of
good is a house empty of the Book of Allah.’
In his Gharīb Abū ‘Ubayd quotes ‘Abdullāh (ibn Mas‘ūd): ‘This Qur’an is
the Banquet of Allah. Whoever enters it is safe.’ He said, ‘The interpretation
of the hadith is that it is a metaphor. The Qur’an is likened to something
Allah has prepared for people. They have good and benefit from it. Then
He invites them to it.’ If the word is ‘ma’dubah’, then it is something that
someone prepares and then invites people to partake of. If it is read as
‘ma’dabah’, it means the means of instruction which leads to someone having
good manners (adab). The evidence for this is found in another hadith: ‘This
Qur’an is the means of instruction of Allah Almighty, so learn from His
means of instruction.’ Al-Aḥmar said that both words are from different
dialects and mean the same thing, but I have not heard anyone besides him
say this. I prefer the first explanation.
Al-Bukhārī transmits from ‘Uthmān ibn ‘Affān that the Prophet g said,
‘The best of you is the one who learns the Qur’an and teaches it.’ Muslim
transmitted from Abū Mūsā that the Messenger of Allah g said, ‘The
metaphor of a believer who recites the Qur’an is that of a citron – its scent is
fragrant and its taste is good. The metaphor of a believer who does not
recite the Qur’an is that of a date – it has no scent but its taste is sweet. The
metaphor of a hypocrite who recites the Qur’an is that of basil – its scent is
fragrant but its taste is bitter. The metaphor of a hypocrite who does not
recite the Qur’an is that of colocynth – it has no scent and its taste is bitter.’
One variant has ‘deviant’ instead of ‘hypocrite’.
Abū Bakr al-Anbārī mentioned that Aḥmad ibn Yaḥyā al-Ḥulwānī
reported from Yaḥyā ibn ‘Abd al-Ḥamīd from Hushaym, and from Idrīs
from Khalaf from Hushaym from al-‘Awwām ibn Ḥawshab that when
someone finished the Qur’an, Abū ‘Abd ar-Raḥmān as-Sulamī would have
him sit before him and put his hand on his head and say to him, ‘You! Fear
Allah! I do not know of anyone better than you if you act by what you
know.’ Ad-Dārimī reported that Wahb adh-Dhimārī said, ‘If Allah gives
someone the Qur’an and he stands reciting it at the ends of the night and
the ends of the day and acts by what is in it and dies in obedience, on the
Day of Rising Allah will raise him up with the angels and Prophets.’
Muslim related that ‘Ā’ishah reported that the Messenger of Allah g said,
‘Someone who recites the Qur’an and is fluent in it is with the noble pious

 angels. Someone who recites the Qur’an and stammers in it has two
rewards, as it is difficult for him.’ He will have one reward for the recitation
and one reward for the difficulty. The levels of the fluent reciter are all
above that, because the Qur’an was difficult for him and then he rose
beyond that to be like the angels. Allah knows best.
At-Tirmidhī reports from ‘Abdullāh ibn Mas‘ūd that the Messenger of
Allah g said, ‘Whoever recites a letter of the Book of Allah earns a good
deed, and each good deed is worth ten like it. I do not say that ‘Alif-Lām-
Mīm’ is one letter, but that alif is a letter, lām is a letter, and mīm is a letter.’
He said that it is a sound ḥasan gharīb hadith by this path of transmission. It
is also related mawqūf.
Muslim reported that ‘Uqbah ibn ‘Āmir said, ‘The Messenger of Allah g
came out to us while we were in the Ṣuffah and asked, “Which of you would
like to go every day to Buṭḥān or to al-‘Aqīq and bring two large-humped
she-camels from it without wrongdoing?” We said, “Messenger of Allah, all
of us would like that!” He said, “Does not one of you go to the mosque and
learn or recite two āyahs from the Book of Allah? That is better for him than
two camels, and three āyahs are better for him than three camels, four āyahs
are better than four camels, and so on regarding the number of camels.”’
Abū Hurayrah reported that the Messenger of Allah g said, ‘Allah will
relieve anyone who relieves a believer of one of the afflictions of this world of
one of the afflictions of the Day of Rising. Allah will give ease in this world
and the Next to anyone who eases the hardship of another. Allah will veil
anyone who veils another Muslim in this world and the Next. Allah will help
His slave as long as His slave is helping his brother. Whoever travels a path
on which he seeks knowledge, Allah will make the path to the Garden easy
for him. People do not meet in one of the houses of Allah to recite the Book
of Allah and study it together without tranquillity descending on them,
mercy covering them, angels encircling them and Allah mentioning them to
those who are with Him.’
Abū Dāwūd, an-Nasā’ī, ad-Dārimī, and at-Tirmidhī reported that ‘Uqbah
ibn ‘Āmir heard the Prophet g say, ‘The one who recites the Qur’an
publicly is like the person who gives his ṣadaqah publicly. The one who
recites the Qur’an secretly is like the person who conceals his ṣadaqah.’ At-
Tirmidhī said that it is a ḥasan gharīb hadith. At-Tirmidhī reported from Abū
Hurayrah that the Prophet g said, ‘The Qur’an will come on the Day of

 Rising and say, “O Lord, robe him!” and He will put on him the crown of
nobility. It will say, “O Lord, more!” and He will put on him the robe of
honour. Then it will say, “O Lord, be pleased with him!” and He will be
pleased with him. It will be said, “Recite and ascend,” and he will be
increased with a good deed for every āyah.’ He said that it is a sound hadith.
Abū Dāwūd reported from ‘Abdullāh ibn ‘Amr that the Messenger of Allah
g said, ‘Those who know the Qur’an will be told, “Recite and ascend.
Recite slowly as you did in the world below. Your station will be at the last
verse you recite.”’ Ibn Mājah transmits it in the Sunan from Abū Sa‘īd al-
Khudrī who reported that the Messenger of Allah g said, ‘The one who
knows the Qur’an will be told, “Recite and ascend.” He will recite and rise a
degree by every āyah until he reaches the last one he has.’
Abū Bakr al-Anbārī transmitted from Abū Umāmah al-Ḥimṣī that the
Messenger of Allah g said, ‘Whoever is given a third of the Qur’an has
been given a third of Prophethood. Whoever is given two-thirds of the
Qur’an has been given two-thirds of Prophethood. Whoever recites all of
the Qur’an has been given all of Prophethood although he has not received
any revelation. On the Day of Rising he will be told, “Recite and ascend.”
He will recite an āyah and rise a degree until he finishes what he knows of
the Qur’an. Then he will be told, “Take,” and he will take. Then he will be
asked, “Do you know what is in your hands? Eternity is in your right hand
and bliss in your left.”’
Idrīs ibn Khalaf related from Ismā‘īl ibn ‘Ayyāsh from Tammām from al-
Ḥasan that the Messenger of Allah g said, ‘Whoever takes a third of the
Qur’an and acts on it has taken a third of Prophethood. Whoever takes half
of the Qur’an and acts on it has taken half of Prophethood. Whoever takes
all of the Qur’an has taken all of Prophethood.’
Muḥammad ibn Yaḥyā al-Marwazī related from Muḥammad ibn Sa‘dān
from al-Ḥusayn ibn Muḥammad from Ḥafṣ from Kathīr ibn Zādhān from
‘Āṣim ibn Ḍamrah from ‘Alī that the Messenger of Allah g said, ‘If
someone reads the Qur’an, recites it and memorises it, Allah will admit him
to the Garden and let him intercede for all the people of his family for
whom the Fire is mandatory.’ Umm ’d-Dardā’ said, ‘I visited ‘Ā’ishah and
asked her, “What is the excellence of the one who recites the Qur’an over
the one who does not recite it among those who enter the Garden?”
‘Ā’ishah replied, “The number of the āyahs of the Qur’an is according to the

 number of degrees of the Garden. No one will enter the Garden better than
the one who recites the Qur’an.”’ Abū Muḥammad Makkī mentioned it.
Ibn ‘Abbās said, ‘If anyone recites the Qur’an and follows what is in it,
Allah has guided him out of misguidance and will protect him on the Day of
Rising from an evil reckoning. That is because Allah says, “All those who
follow My guidance will not go astray and will not be miserable.” (20:121)’ Ibn
‘Abbās also said, ‘Allah has guaranteed that the one who follows the Qur’an
will not go astray in this world nor be wretched in the Next.’ Makkī also
mentioned that. Al-Layth said, ‘It was said that mercy does not come
quicker to anyone than to the one who listens to the Qur’an, according to
the words of the Almighty, “When the Qur’an is recited, listen to it and be silent so
that hopefully you will gain mercy.” (7:204)’ The word ‘hopefully’ makes it
mandatory for Allah.’
In the Musnad of Abū Dāwūd aṭ-Ṭayālisī, which is the first Musnad
composed in Islam, it is reported from ‘Abdullāh ibn ‘Amr that the
Messenger of Allah g said, ‘Anyone who stands [in prayer] for ten āyahs will
not be written among the heedless. Anyone who stands for a hundred āyahs
will be written among the obedient. Anyone who stands for a thousand āyahs
will be written among those with heaps [qinṭārs] of reward.’ There are many
traditions about this, and what we have mentioned is adequate. Allah is the
One who grants success in guidance.

 How to recite the Book of Allah and what is disliked and
forbidden in respect of it, and people’s disagreement about that
Al-Bukhārī transmitted that Qatādah said, ‘I asked Anas about the
recitation of the Messenger of Allah g and he said, “He would lengthen
syllables when he recited, ‘In the Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, Most Merciful.’
He would extend the name ‘Allah’, extend ‘ar-Raḥmān’ (the All-Merciful)
and extend ‘ar-Raḥīm’ (the Most Merciful).”’ At-Tirmidhī reported that
Umm Salamah said, ‘The Messenger of Allah g used to put stops in his
recitation. He would say, “Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds,” and stop,
“the All-Merciful, Most Merciful,” and stop. Then he would recite, “Master of the
Day of Repayment.”’ He said that it is a gharīb hadith. Abū Dāwūd transmitted
a similar hadith.
It is related that the Prophet g said, ‘The person with the best voice is the
one that you see fears Allah Almighty when he recites.’ It is related that
Ziyād an-Numayrī came with the reciters to Anas ibn Mālik and was told to
recite. He raised his voice and intoned. He had a loud voice and Anas
uncovered his face, as he had a black cloth over it, and exclaimed, ‘You!
What is this you are doing?’ When he saw something he objected to, he
would remove the cloth from his face.
It is related that Qays ibn ‘Ubbād said, ‘The Companions of the
Messenger of Allah g used to dislike raising the voice in dhikr.’ Those who
disliked raising the voice in recitation of the Qur’an included Sa‘īd ibn al-
Musayyab, Sa‘īd ibn Jubayr, al-Qāsim ibn Muḥammad, al-Ḥasan, Ibn Sīrīn,
an-Nakha‘ī and others. Mālik ibn Anas and Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal also disliked
it. All of them disliked raising the voice with the Qur’an and intoning it. It is
related that Sa‘īd ibn al-Musayyab heard ‘Umar ibn ‘Abd al-‘Azīz leading
the people and he intoned in his recitation. Sa‘īd sent a message to him
saying, ‘May Allah put you right! Imams should not recite like that.’ So
‘Umar stopped singing. Al-Qāsim ibn Muḥammad said, ‘A man recited in
the mosque of the Prophet g and intoned and al-Qāsim objected to that.
He said, ‘Allah Almighty says, “Truly it is a Mighty Book. Falsehood cannot reach it
from before it or behind it.” (41:40-41)’ Mālik related that he was asked about
nabr (raising the pitch of the voice) when reciting the Qur’an in the prayer,
and he disliked that strongly and objected to the raising the pitch of the
voice in recitation. Ibn al-Qāsim related from him that he was asked about

 melody in the prayer and he said, ‘I do not like it.’ He said, ‘It is a kind of
singing which they do and for which they are paid money.’
One group permit raising the voice in the Qur’an and intoning it. That is
because, when someone beautifies his voice when reciting it, it settles more
deeply in the selves and the hearts listen more to it. They find evidence in
the words of the Prophet g, ‘Adorn the Qur’an with your voices.’ Al-Barā’
ibn ‘Āzib related it and Abū Dāwūd and an-Nasā’ī transmitted it. The
Prophet g said, ‘He who does not sing the Qur’an is not one of us.’ Muslim
transmitted it. There is also what Abū Mūsā told the Prophet g: ‘If I had
known that you listened to my recitation, I would have beautified it for you.’
‘Abdullāh ibn Mughaffal said, ‘In a journey in the year of the Conquest, the
Messenger of Allah g recited Sūrat al-Fatḥ on his mount and he used a
quavering tone in his recitation.’ Some of those who believed this were Abū
Ḥanīfah and his people, ash-Shāfi‘ī, Ibn al-Mubārak and an-Naḍr ibn
Shumayl. It is the choice of aṭ-Ṭabarī, Abu-l-Ḥasan ibn Baṭṭāl, Qāḍī Abū
Bakr ibn al-‘Arabī and others.
The first position is sounder because of what we already mentioned and
will mention. As for using the first hadith as evidence, it is not apparent. It is
an example of the reversal of the normal order and in fact means, ‘Adorn
your voices with the Qur’an.’ Al-Khaṭṭābī said, ‘That is how more than one
of the Imams of hadith have explained it, saying it is reversal.’ Ma‘mar
related that from Manṣūr from Ṭalḥah.
Al-Khaṭṭābī related from al-Barā’ that the Messenger of Allah g said,
‘Adorn the Qur’an with your voices.’ He said, ‘It means persist in its
recitation and employ your voices to do it and take it as a sign and
adornment.’ It is said that it means to encourage people to recite the Qur’an
and persist in it. It is related from Abū Hurayrah that he heard the
Messenger of Allah g say, ‘Adorn your voices with the Qur’an.’ It is related
that ‘Umar said, ‘Make your voices good with the Qur’an.’
This is what the words of the Prophet g are referring to when he said,
‘The one who does not sing the Qur’an is not one of us,’ meaning ‘the one
who does not make his voice good with the Qur’an is not one of us.’ That is
how ‘Abdullāh ibn Abī Mulaykah interpreted it. ‘Abd al-Jabbār ibn al-Wird
said that he heard Ibn Abī Mulaykah say that ‘Abdullāh ibn Abī Yazīd said,
‘Abū Lubābah passed us and we followed him until he went into his house.
He was a man of shabby appearance. I heard him say, “I heard the

 Messenger of Allah g say, ‘He who does not sing the Qur’an is not one of
us.’”’ ‘Abd al-Jabbār said, ‘I asked Ibn Abī Mulaykah, “Abū Muḥammad,
what do you think of the one who does not have a good voice?” He replied,
“He makes it as good as he can.”’ Abū Dāwūd mentioned it.
This is also the meaning of Abū Mūsā’s words to the Prophet g: ‘If I had
known that you were listening to my recitation, I would have made my voice
good in the Qur’an, adorned it and used tartīl (slow recitation).’ This
indicates that he was quick in his recitation with a good natural voice. If he
had known that the Prophet g was listening, he would have extended his
recitation and used tartīl as he usually did when he recited to the Messenger
of Allah g. He used to do that in order to increase the beauty of his voice
when reciting.
We seek refuge with Allah from interpreting what the Messenger of Allah
g said as meaning that the Qur’an can be adorned by voices or anything
else! Whoever interprets it in this way has committed something terrible in
saying that the Qur’an is in need of someone to adorn it. It is Light,
Illumination, and the Highest Adornment for the one who wears its
splendour and is illuminated by its light. It is said that the command to
adorn means to learn the readings and to adorn them with our voices. That
implies: ‘adorn the recitation with your voices,’ since ‘qur’ān’ means
recitation as Allah says, ‘The recitation (qur’ān) of dawn.’ (17:78) According to
this interpretation, it is valid that it simply means ‘to recite’ as we made
clear. It is as is reported in Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim that ‘Abdullāh ibn ‘Amr said, ‘There
are some shayṭāns imprisoned in the sea whom Solomon chained. It will
soon be the time when they will emerge and recite something (qur’ān) to
people.’
It is said that the word understood as ‘singing’ (yataghannā) comes from
istighnā’, ‘not having any need’, not from ghinā’ (singing). This was the
interpretation adopted by Sufyān ibn ‘Uyaynah and Wakī‘ ibn al-Jarrāḥ.
Sufyān related that from Sa‘d ibn Abī Waqqāṣ. Another point is also related
from Sufyān that Isḥāq ibn Rāhwayh mentioned, which is that it means ‘to
be enriched and without need of other words’. This is the interpretation
preferred by al-Bukhārī when he dealt with the verse, ‘Is it not enough for them
that We have sent down to you the Book which is recited to them?’ (29:51) What is
meant by being enriched by the Qur’an is not being in need of the history of
the nations. Interpreters have said that.

 It is said that ‘yataghannā’ means to display sorrow. In other words sorrow
should appear in the reciter when he reads and recites. It does not come
from ‘ghunyah’ (being able to dispense with) because a different form of the
verb would have been used for that. A group of scholars believed that,
including Imam Ibn Ḥibbān al-Bustī. Their evidence was what Muṭarrif ibn
‘Abdullāh ibn ash-Shikhkhīr related from his father: ‘I came to the
Messenger of Allah g while he was praying and his chest was heaving like a
cauldron from weeping.’ They said, ‘This report makes it clear that what is
meant is displaying sorrow. This is also supported by what the Imams
related from ‘Abdullāh: “The Prophet g said, ‘Recite to me.’ So I recited
Sūrat an-Nisā’ to him until I reached the āyah, ‘How will it be when We bring a
witness from every nation and bring you as a witness against them?’ (4:41) I saw his
eyes overflowing with tears.”’
These are four interpretations and none of them indicate that recitation is
done with tunes or quavering voices. Abū Sa‘īd al-A‘rābī said about ‘He
who does not sing the Qur’an is not one of us’: ‘The Arabs were keen on
singing and using verse in most of what they said. When the Qur’an was
revealed, they wanted to use the Qur’an as their chant instead of singing,
and the Prophet said this.’
The fifth interpretation is what some claim as evidence for quavering and
singing. ‘Umar ibn Shabbah said, ‘I told Abū ‘Āsim about Ibn ‘Uyaynah’s
interpretation regarding “singing” meaning “being free of need” and he
said, “Ibn ‘Uyaynah did not do well.”’ Ash-Shāfi‘ī was asked about the
interpretation of Ibn ‘Uyaynah and said, ‘I know better than this. If the
Prophet g had meant not having need, he would have said it. He said,
“singing” and so we know that he meant singing.’ Aṭ-Ṭabarī said, ‘What is
known in our view is that in the language of the Arabs taghannin is singing,
which is using a good voice with quavering. It is as a poet said:
Sing the poem whenever you declaim it.
Singing (ghinā’) this poetry is the arena.’
He said, ‘As for those who claim that it means “being without need”, that is
not part of the language and poetry of the Arabs. We do not know any of
the people of knowledge who said that.’
In respect of what aṭ-Ṭabarī claimed about taghannā not meaning istighnā’ in

 Arabic, al-Jawharī stated what we mentioned as did al-Harawī. There is
nothing to prevent it meaning istighnā’, as it is indeed more appropriate to
accept that which is related from a great Companion as Sufyān reported.
Ibn Wahb said about Sufyān, ‘I have not seen anyone with better knowledge
of the interpretation of hadiths than Sufyān ibn ‘Uyaynah.’
A sixth interpretation is what has been narrated in the form of an addition
in Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim, which is that Abū Hurayrah heard the Messenger of Allah
g say, ‘Allah does not listen to anything so gladly as He listens to a Prophet
with a good voice chanting the Qur’an aloud.’ Aṭ-Ṭabarī said, ‘If it had
been as Ibn ‘Uyaynah said, there would be no point in mentioning a good
voice and aloud.’ The word ‘aloud’ can be part of the words of the Prophet
g, Abū Hurayrah or someone else. If it is the first, which is unlikely, it is
evidence of lack of warbling (taṭrīb) and quavering because he did not say
that. He said ‘aloud’, meaning so that he and those around him can hear
him, as the Prophet g said to someone he heard raising his voice in the
shahādah, ‘People! Be kind to yourselves. You are not calling out to someone
dead or absent.’ So there is no evidence for what they claim. Some of our
scholars preferred this interpretation, saying that it is the most likely because
the Arabs use the term translated as ‘singing out’ for the one who raises his
voice and directs it to someone absent even if it had no tune. He said, ‘This
is the explanation of the Companion, and he knows their manner of
speaking far better.’
Abu-l-Ḥasan ibn Baṭṭāl argues for the school of ash-Shāfi‘ī and says, ‘The
removal of the difficulty regarding this question is found in what Ibn Abī
Shaybah reported from Zayd ibn al-Ḥubāb from Mūsā ibn ‘Alī ibn Rabāḥ
from his father that ‘Uqbah ibn ‘Āmir said that the Messenger of Allah g
said, ‘Learn the Qur’an, sing it and write it. By the One who has my soul in
His hand, it is more likely to escape than a camel from the hobble.’ Our
scholars said, ‘Even if this hadith has a sound isnād, what is known
absolutely and definitively refutes it: the recitation of the Qur’an has
reached us mutawātir from many shaykhs, generation after generation back
to the noble era and to the Messenger of Allah g, and there was no making
of tunes or intoning (taṭrīb) related by them, whereas they go into depth
regarding the pronunciation of the letters, maddah, idghām, iẓhār and other
types of recitation.’
Furthermore, in quavering and intoning, there is putting a hamzah on what

 does not have a hamzah and a lengthening of what should not be lengthened.
So the single alif will be made into two alifs and one wāw into two. That
leads to an increase in the Qur’an which is forbidden. If that occurs in a
place where there is hamzah, they make several hamzahs. It may be said that
‘Abdullāh ibn Mughaffal said that the Messenger of Allah g recited on his
camel in the Year of the Conquest of Makkah (8/630) and quavered, which
al-Bukhārī mentioned. He said, describing it, ‘ā, ā, ā’ three times. That may
mean ishbā’ which is lengthening the vowel of the maddah in its proper place.
It is also possible that the story of his voice has to do with the rocking of his
camel, as it happens to someone in a loud voice when he is riding and his
voice tightens and is cut because of the rocking of the camel. Since this is
possible, then it cannot be considered as evidence. Ḥāfiẓ Abū Sa‘īd ‘Abd al-
Ghanī ibn Sa’īd transmitted from the hadith of Qatādah from ‘Abd ar-
Raḥmān ibn Abī Bakr who reported that his father said, ‘The recitation of
the Messenger of Allah g was extended (madd) but there was no quavering
(tarjī‘).’ Ibn Jurayj reported that Ibn ‘Abbās said, ‘The Messenger of Allah
had a mu’adhdhin who intoned. The Messenger of Allah g said, “The adhān
should be easy and smooth (i.e. without trilling). If your adhān is not easy and
smooth, then do not give the adhān.”’ Ad-Dāraquṭnī transmitted it in the
Sunan. If the Prophet g forbade it in the adhān, it is more likely that he
would not permit it in the Qur’an, which is preserved by the All-Merciful, as
Allah says, ‘It is We who have sent down the Reminder and We will preserve it’ (15:9)
and ‘Falsehood cannot reach it from before it or behind it – it is a revelation from One
Who is All-Wise, Praiseworthy.’ (41:42)
This disagreement regarding recitation is a result of the meaning of the
Qur’an not being understood due to the echoing of sounds and the great
amount of quavering. If the matter goes further so that the meaning cannot
be understood, then that is agreed to be forbidden. This is done by reciters
in the towns of Egypt who recite before kings and at funerals and receive
wages and stipends for doing so. Their effort is misguided and their action is
nullified. By so doing they open the way to the alteration of the Book of
Allah and it makes it easy for them to be bold against Allah by adding to
His revelation what was not in it out of ignorance in their dīn, deviation
from the Sunnah of their Prophet g, rejecting the course of the righteous
Salaf in respect of that matter, and longing for what shayṭān has made seem
attractive in respect of what they do. They ‘suppose that they are doing

 good’ while they compound their error and play with the Book of Allah. We
belong to Allah and to Him we are returning. The Truthful One g
reported that that would happen and so it is as he g reported it would be.
Imam Ḥāfiẓ Abu-l-Ḥusayn Razīn and Abū ‘Abdullāh at-Tirmidhī al-
Ḥakīm in Nawādir al-uṣūl reported the hadith transmitted by Ḥudhayfah in
which the Messenger of Allah g said, ‘Recite the Qur’an with the tunes
and voices of the Arabs and beware of the tunes of the people of passionate
love and the tunes of the People of the two Books [meaning the Torah and
Gospel]. After you will come a people who make their voices quaver while
reciting the Qur’an, as is done in singing and wailing. That will not go
beyond their throats. Their hearts are tempted, and attracting the hearts of
those who admire them is what really concerns them.’ ‘Tunes’ refers to
intoning, making the voice quaver and being good in recitation, poetry and
singing.
Our scholars state that this is like those of the reciters of our time who do
that before prayers and in gatherings, using foreign tunes which the Prophet
g forbade. Quavering (tarjī‘) in recitation is to repeat the letters like the
Christians do. Tartīl in reciting the Qur’an is to recite slowly and
deliberately, and to make the letters and vowels clear. It is like the petals of
the daisy. It is desirable when reciting the Qur’an. Allah says, ‘Recite the
Qur’an distinctly.’ (73:4) Umm Salamah was asked about the recitation and
prayer of the Prophet g and she said, ‘What do you have to do with his
prayer! He prayed and then slept the amount he prayed. Then he prayed
the amount he slept and then he slept the amount he prayed until morning.’
Then she described his recitation, which was an explanatory recitation,
letter by letter. An-Nasā‘ī, Abū Dāwūd and at-Tirmidhī transmitted it as
being sound ḥasan gharīb.

 Cautioning the people of the Qur’an and scholars against
showing off
Allah Almighty says: ‘Worship Allah and do not associate anything with Him’
(4:36) and the Almighty also says: ‘So let him who hopes to meet his Lord act rightly
and not associate anyone in the worship of his Lord.’ (18:105). Muslim reported
from Abū Hurayrah that he heard the Messenger of Allah g say, ‘The first
of people to be judged on the Day of Rising will be a man who was
martyred. He will be brought forward and will be informed of the blessings
he had and will acknowledge them. Allah will ask, “What did you do with
them?” He will say, “I fought for You until I was martyred.” Allah will say,
“You lie. Rather you fought so it would be said, ‘A brave man!’ And so it was
said.” Then the command will be given and he will be dragged on his face
until he is thrown into the Fire. There will also be a man who studied
knowledge and taught it and recited the Qur’an. He will be brought and
informed of his blessings which he will acknowledge. Allah will say, “What
did you do with them?” He will reply, “I studied knowledge and taught it
and I recited the Qur’an for Your sake.” Allah will say, “You lie. Rather you
studied so that it would be said, ‘A scholar!’ and you recited so that it would
be said, ‘He is a reciter!’ And so it was said.” Then the command will be
given and he will be dragged on his face until he is thrown into the Fire.
There will also be a man to whom Allah gave a lot of wealth and all sorts of
property. He will be brought and informed of his blessings which he will
acknowledge. Allah will ask, “What did you do with them?” He will answer,
“There was no path in which You like spending to be done but that I spent
in it for Your sake.” Allah will say, “You lie. Rather you did it so that it
would be said, ‘He is generous.’ and so it was said.” Then the command will
be given and he will be dragged on his face until he is thrown into the Fire.’
At-Tirmidhī said about this hadith: ‘The Messenger of Allah g then knelt
and said, ‘Abū Hurayrah, these three will be the first of Allah’s creation to
be burned by the Fire on the Day of Rising.’ Abū Hurayrah’s name was
either ‘Abdullāh or ‘Abd ar-Raḥmān. He said, ‘I received my kunyah, Abū
Hurayrah, because I carried a kitten in my sleeve. The Messenger of Allah
g saw me and asked, “What is this?” I said, “A cat (hirrah),” and he said,
“Abū Hurayrah!”’ Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr said, ‘This hadith is about someone who
does not intend to please Allah by his action and his knowledge. It is related

 that the Prophet g said, “If someone seeks knowledge for other than the
sake of Allah or intends it for other than the sake of Allah, he should take his
seat in the Fire.”’
In the Raqā’iq, Ibn al-Mubārak transmitted from al-‘Abbās ibn ‘Abd al-
Muṭṭalib that the Messenger of Allah g said, ‘This dīn will be victorious
until it crosses the sea and until you plunge into the sea with horses in the
Way of Allah Almighty. Then there will come a people who recite the
Qur’an. When they recite it, they will say, “Who reads more than us? Who
knows more than us?”’ Then he turned to his Companions and said, ‘Do
you think that there will be any good in those?’ ‘No,’ they replied. He said,
‘Those are from you and those are from this Community and those are the
fuel of the Fire.’ Abū Dāwūd and at-Tirmidhī transmitted that the
Messenger of Allah g said, ‘Anyone who learns knowledge which should be
learned for the sake of Allah, the Mighty and Majestic, only to obtain by it
goods of this world, will not experience the scent of the Garden on the Day
of Rising.’ At-Tirmidhī said it is a ḥasan hadith.
It is related from Abū Hurayrah that the Messenger of Allah g said, ‘Seek
refuge with Allah from the Pit of Sorrow.’ They asked, ‘Messenger of Allah,
what is the Pit of Sorrow?’ He replied, ‘It is a valley in Hell from which Hell
seeks refuge a hundred times a day.’ He was asked, ‘Messenger of Allah,
who will enter it?’ He replied, ‘Those who recite to show off their actions.’
He said that it is a gharīb hadith. In the book of Asad ibn Mūsā it is reported
that the Prophet g said, ‘There is a valley in Hell, and Hell seeks refuge
from the evil of that valley seven times a day. In that valley is a pit, and Hell
and that valley seek refuge from the evil of that pit. In that pit is a serpent
and Hell, the valley and the pit seek refuge with Allah from the evil of that
serpent seven times. Allah has prepared it for the wretched among those
who know the Qur’an but disobey Allah.’
So the one who knows the Qur’an and seeks knowledge should fear Allah
regarding himself and act sincerely for Allah. If he does anything which is
disliked, he should hasten to repent and begin to show sincerity in his goal
and his actions. The one who knows the Qur’an must guard himself even
more carefully than others, as he has a wage which others do not have. At-
Tirmidhī transmitted that Abu-d-Dardā’ reported that the Messenger of
Allah g said, ‘Allah revealed in one of the Books to one of the Prophets,
“Warn those who seek understanding for other than the dīn and learn for

 other than action and seek this world by the deeds of the Next World. They
wear sheepskins in front of people to give the impression of meekness while
their hearts are like the hearts of wolves. Their tongues are sweeter than
honey while their hearts are more bitter than aloes. They try to deceive Me
and make light of Me. I will send them trials which will leave even the
forbearing bewildered.”’
Aṭ-Ṭabarī transmitted in Adab an-nufūs from Abū Kurayb Muḥammad ibn
al-‘Alā’ from al-Muḥāribī from ‘Amr ibn ‘Āmir al-Bajalī from Ibn Ṣadaqah
that one of the Companions of the Prophet said that the Messenger of Allah
g said, ‘Do not try to deceive Allah. If anyone tries to deceive Allah, Allah
will deceive him. It is his own self which is deceived if only he were aware.’
They asked, ‘Messenger of Allah, how can someone try to deceive Allah?’
He replied, ‘By doing what Allah has commanded while seeking other than
Him by it. Fear showing-off. It is shirk. The one who shows off will be
summoned before witnesses on the Day of Rising by four names which he is
called: “O unbeliever! O loser! O perfidious! O deviant! Your actions are
lost and your reward is nullified. You have no share today. Seek your reward
from those you acted for, O impostor!’’
It is reported from ‘Alqamah that ‘Abdullāh ibn Mas‘ūd said, ‘How will you
feel when you are enveloped by a trial in which children grow old, the old
become senile and people act according to an innovated sunnah? When any
of it is changed, it will be said, “The sunnah has been changed.”’ He was
asked, ‘When will that be, Abū ‘Abd ar-Raḥmān?’ He replied, ‘When your
reciters are many and your fuqahā’ are few, and your leaders are many and
your trusted ones are few, and this world is sought through the actions of the
Next World and people learn fiqh for other than the dīn.’ Sufyān ibn
‘Uyaynah said, ‘I heard that Ibn ‘Abbās said, “If those who know the
Qur’an had taken it as it should be taken and in the way that is proper for it,
Allah would love them. But they seek this world by it and so Allah hates
them and they are indulgent with people.”’ It is related from Abū Ja‘far
Muḥammad ibn ‘Alī about the words of the Almighty, ‘They will be bundled
headfirst into it, they and the misled’ (26:94), ‘This refers to people who describe
the truth and justice with their tongues and then oppose it by espousing
something other than that.’

 What someone who knows the Qur’an must do and not neglect
to do
The first thing is to be sincere in seeking it for the sake of Allah as we
mentioned. You should make yourself recite the Qur’an night and day, in
the prayer or outside the prayer, so that you do not forget it. Muslim
transmitted from Ibn ‘Umar that the Messenger of Allah g said, ‘The
example of the one who knows the Qur’an is like the one who has hobbled
camels. If he takes care of them, he will keep them. If he releases them, they
will go off. When the one who knows the Qur’an stands and recites it night
and day, he remembers it. If he does not do that, he forgets it.’ So someone
who knows Qur’an must praise Allah, be thankful for His blessing,
remember Him, rely on Him, seek His help, desire Him and cling to Him.
He must remember death and prepare for it. He should fear his wrong
actions and hope for his Lord’s pardon. When his health is good his fear
should be stronger since he does not know what his seal will be. When he is
close to dying, his hope should be stronger on account of his good opinion
of Allah. The Messenger of Allah g said, ‘None of you should die except
with a good opinion of Allah.’ This means you should think that He will
have mercy on you and forgive you.
He should know the people of his time, preserve himself from the ruler, and
strive to save himself and save his life, having to hand what he can of the
goods of this world, striving for himself in that as much as he can. His
greatest concern should be scrupulousness in his dīn, fearfulness of Allah
and watchful awareness of Him regarding what He commands and forbids.
Ibn Mas‘ūd said, ‘The one who recites the Qur’an should be known by his
nights when people are asleep and his days when people are not fasting, his
weeping when people laugh, his silence when people delve into improper
matters, his humility when they are arrogant and his sorrow when they are
happy.’ ‘Abdullāh ibn ‘Amr said, ‘The one who knows the Qur’an should not
delve with those who delve, nor be ignorant with the ignorant, but he should
pardon and overlook by the right of the Qur’an because inside of him are
the words of Allah Almighty. He must protect himself from doubtful paths
and laugh little and speak little in the gatherings of Qur’an and elsewhere
concerning anything in which there is no benefit. He must be forbearing
and grave.’

 He should be humble to the poor and avoid arrogance and vanity. He
should withdraw from this world and its people if he fears temptation for
himself, and should abandon argumentation and dispute. He should make
an effort to be kind and show proper manners. He should be with those
from whose evil he is safe, whose good he hopes for and from whose injury
he is safe. He should not listen to those who slander in his presence and
should keep the company of those who lead him to what is good and direct
him to truthfulness and noble character, those who adorn him and do not
sully him.
He must learn the rulings of the Qur’an and understand what Allah means
and what He mandates. Then he will benefit from what he reads and act by
what he recites. How vile is the one who knows the Qur’an and recites its
obligations and rulings by heart but does not understand what he recites!
How can the one who does not understand what it means act? How ugly it
is that he is asked about the fiqh of what he recites but does not know it! The
metaphor of someone with a state like this is only that of ‘a donkey who carries
volumes’ (62:5).
He should know the Makkan from the Madinan sūrahs so that by that he
can distinguish between what Allah told His slaves at the beginning of Islam
and what was recommended for them at the end, what He made obligatory
for them at the beginning of Islam and those obligations He added to it at
the end. The Madinan abrogates the Makkan in most of the Qur’an. It is
not possible for the Makkan to abrogate the Madinan because the
abrogated was revealed before the abrogating. Part of his perfection is to
know the i‘rāb (inflection/grammar) and unusual words. That is part of what
will make it easy for him to know what he reads and will remove doubt from
him in what he recites.
Abū Ja‘far aṭ-Ṭabarī said, ‘I heard al-Jarmī say, “For thirty years, I have
been giving people fatwās concerning fiqh taken from the book of Sībawayh
[i.e. based on grammar].”’ Muḥammad ibn Yazīd said, ‘That was because
Abū ‘Umar al-Jarmī knew hadiths. When he learned the book of Sībawayh,
he learned fiqh from hadith since it is from the book of Sībawayh that he
learned investigation and tafsīr. Then he looked into the sunnahs which are
firmly transmitted from the Messenger of Allah g. It is by means of them
that the seeker attains to what Allah means in His Book and that opens up
for him the judgments of the Qur’an. Aḍ-Ḍaḥḥāk said about the words of

 the Almighty, “Be people of the Lord because of your knowledge of the Book” (3:79),
“It is a duty for whoever learns the Qur’an to be a faqīh.”’
Ibn Abi-l-Ḥawārī said, ‘A group of us went to Fuḍayl ibn ‘Iyāḍ in 185 AH
and stopped at his door, but he did not give us permission to enter. One of
the people said, “If he comes out for anything, he will come out to recitation
of the Qur’an.” So we ordered a reciter to recite and he appeared to us at a
window. We said, “Peace be upon you and the mercy of Allah.” He said,
“And peace upon you.” We asked, “How are you, Abū ‘Alī?” He replied, “I
am in well-being from Allah and harm from you. What you are doing is
something new in Islam. We belong to Allah and are returning to Him! This
is not how to seek knowledge! We used to go to the shaykhs and would not
see ourselves worthy of sitting with them. We sat below them and
eavesdropped. When a hadith was given, we would ask them to repeat it
and we would retain it. You seek knowledge with ignorance. You waste the
Book of Allah. If you had sought the Book of Allah, you would have found
in it healing for what you want.” We said, “We have studied the Qur’an.”
He said, “Your study of the Qur’an is work enough for your lives and the
lives of your children!” We asked, “How, Abū ‘Alī?” He replied, “You will
not learn the Qur’an until you know its i‘rāb (syntax), its muḥkam from its
mutashābih, and its abrogating from its abrogated. When you know that, then
you will have no need of the words of Fuḍayl and Ibn ‘Uyaynah.” Then he
said, “I seek refuge with Allah, the All-Hearing, All-Knowing from the
Accursed Shayṭān. In the Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, the Most Merciful. ‘O
mankind! An admonition has come to you from your Lord and also healing for what is in
the breasts and guidance and mercy for the believers. Say: “It is the favour of Allah and
His mercy that should be the cause of their rejoicing. That is better than anything they
accumulate.”’” (10:57-58)’
When a reader of the Qur’an obtains these ranks, he will be fluent in the
Qur’an and know the Discrimination. He will be close to the one who
brings him close to it. He will not benefit from anything we have mentioned
until he has a sincere intention for Allah when he seeks it, or continues to
have a sincere intention after learning it, as was already stated. A seeker of
knowledge may begin by desiring reputation and honour in the dīn. Then
his acquisition of knowledge continues until it is clear to him that he has
erred in his belief, and so he repents of that and makes his intention sincere
for Allah. He benefits from that and improves his state. Al-Ḥasan said, ‘We

 used to seek knowledge for the sake of this world and it dragged us to the
Next World.’ Sufyān ath-Thawrī said that. Ḥabīb ibn Abī Thābit said, ‘We
sought this matter and we had no intention in respect of it. The intention
came afterwards.’

 The syntax of the Qur’an, learning it and studying it, and the
reward for the one who recites the Qur’an with proper
inflections
Abū Bakr al-Anbārī said, ‘The Prophet g, his Companions and their
Followers all mention the excellence of proper understanding of the syntax
of the Qur’an and the encouragement to learn it and censure and dislike
poor grammatical understanding. This obliges the reciters of the Qur’an to
strive to learn it.’
One aspect of that is in what is related by Yaḥyā ibn Sulaymān aḍ-Ḍabbī
from Muḥammad ibn Sa‘īd from Abū Mu‘āwiyah from ‘Abdullāh ibn Sa‘īd
al-Maqburī from his father from his grandfather from Abū Hurayrah who
reported that the Prophet g said, ‘Use the proper syntax in the Arabic of
the Qur’an and search out its unusual words.’ My father related from
Ibrāhīm ibn al-Haytham from Ādam ibn Abī Iyās and Abu-ṭ-Ṭayyib al-
Marwazī from ‘Abd al-‘Azīz ibn Abī Rawwād from Nāfi‘ from Ibn ‘Umar
that the Messenger of Allah g said, ‘If someone recites the Qur’an without
its correct grammar, an angel is entrusted to him to write for him, as it was
revealed, ten good deeds for every letter. When he uses correct grammar for
some of it and fails to do so for some of it, two angels are entrusted who
write down for every letter twenty good deeds. If he inflects it correctly, four
angels are entrusted to him to write down seventy good deeds for every
letter.’ Juwaybir related that aḍ-Ḍaḥḥāk said that ‘Abdullāh ibn Mas‘ūd said,
‘Recite the Qur’an well and adorn it with your voices and employ its correct
syntax. It is Arabic and Allah loves the correct syntax to be employed.’
Mujāhid reported that Ibn ‘Umar said, ‘Use correct syntax in the Qur’an.’
Muḥammad ibn ‘Abd ar-Raḥmān ibn Zayd related that Abū Bakr and
‘Umar said, ‘We prefer some knowledge of the syntax of the Qur’an to
simply memorising its letters.’ Ash-Sha‘bī reported that ‘Umar said, ‘Anyone
who recites the Qur’an with its syntax has the reward with Allah of a
martyr.’ Makḥūl said, ‘We were told that anyone who recites with correct
syntax has double the reward of someone who recites without it.’ Ibn Jurayj
related from ‘Aṭā’ that Ibn ‘Abbās reported that the Messenger of Allah g
said, ‘Love the Arabs for three reasons: because I am an Arab, because the
Qur’an is in Arabic and because the language of the people of the Garden
will be Arabic.’ Sufyān related that Abū Ḥamzah said, ‘Al-Ḥasan was asked

 about people studying Arabic and he said, “They do well. They learn the
language of their Prophet g.”’ Al-Ḥasan was told, ‘We have an imam who
uses ungrammatical Arabic.’ He said, ‘Dismiss him.’
Ibn Abī Mulaykah said, ‘A Bedouin arrived in Madīnah in the time of
‘Umar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb and asked, “Who will recite some of what was
revealed to Muḥammad g?” A man recited Sūrat at-Tawbah to him. He
said, “Allah is free of the idolaters and His Messenger” using the genitive for
Messenger (rasūlihi). The Bedouin said, “Allah is free of His Messenger? If
Allah is free of His Messenger, we are more free of him.” ‘Umar heard what
the Bedouin had said so he summoned him and said, “Bedouin, are you free
of the Messenger of Allah?” He replied, “Amīr al-Mu’minīn, I came to
Madīnah with no knowledge of the Qur’an. I asked someone to recite it to
me and he recited this Sūrat at-Tawbah and said, ‘Allah is free of the
idolaters and His Messenger.’ So I said, ‘Allah is free of His Messenger? If
Allah is free of His Messenger, we are more free of him.’” ‘Umar said, “That
is not how it is, Bedouin.” He asked, “How is it then, Amīr al-Mu’minīn?”
He said, “Allah is free of the idolaters, as is His Messenger (rasūluhu).” The Bedouin
said, “We, by Allah, are more free of what Allah and His Messenger are free
of!” So ‘Umar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb commanded that only those who knew
proper grammar should recite to people, and he commanded Abu-l-Aswad
to set out the grammar.’
‘Alī ibn al-Ja‘d reported that he heard Shu‘bah say, ‘The metaphor of
someone who knows the hadith but does not know Arabic is that of a
donkey that has a nosebag with no fodder in it.’ Ḥammād ibn Salamah said,
‘The one who seeks hadith and does not learn grammar – or Arabic – is like
a donkey who has a nosebag in which there is no barley.’ Ibn ‘Aṭiyyah said,
‘The syntax of the Qur’an is a basic principle in the Sharī‘ah because it is
that by which its meanings, which are the Sharī‘ah, are established.’
Ibn al-Anbārī said, ‘The Companions of the Prophet and their Followers
provide evidence for using language and poetry to explain unusual and
problematic words in the Qur’an, and that demonstrates the soundness of
the school of the grammarians respecting that and the falsity of those who
deny that.’ An element of that is what is related from ‘Ubayd ibn ‘Abd al-
Wāḥid ibn Sharīk al-Bazzāz from Ibn Abī Maryam from Ibn Tarūkh from
Usāmah from ‘Ikrimah that Ibn ‘Abbās said, ‘When you ask me about the
unusual words of Allah, look for them in poetry. Poetry is the lexicon of the

 Arabs.’ Idrīs ibn ‘Abd al-Karīm related from Khalaf from Ḥammād ibn
Zayd from ‘Alī ibn Zayd ibn Jud‘ān who heard Sa‘īd ibn Jubayr and Yūsuf
ibn Mihrān mention that they heard Ibn ‘Abbās being asked about
something in the Qur’an and he replied. ‘It means such and such. Have you
not heard the poet say such-and-such?’ ‘Ikrimah reported that a man asked
Ibn ‘Abbās about the words of Allah, ‘Purify your clothes.’ (74:4) He said, ‘Do
not put on your garment in a state of treachery.’ He cited as an example the
words of Ghaylān ath-Thaqafī:
Allah be praised, I did not put on a garment in treachery
nor cover up evil!
A man asked ‘Ikrimah about a bastard (zanīm) and he said that it is the
child of fornication and cited a verse:
A bastard (zanīm) is not known for his father
with a mother who is a harlot. He has blameworthy lineage.
He also said that zanīm is someone ignoble, base and a false claimant. He
said:
Men competed in increasing the ignoble,
as feet increase the size of the skin.
He also said about the words of the Almighty, ‘shaded by spreading branches
(afnān)’ (55:48) that the gardens have shade and branches. He said, ‘Do you
not hear the words of the poet? He said:
Your yearning does not rouse a dove from a branch,
calling doves to the branches (afnān) of the boughs.
You call to the father of the chicks like a bird
with the talons of the sparrow-hawks.’
‘Ikrimah reported that Ibn ‘Abbās said about the words of the Almighty, ‘at
once they will be at as-sāhirah’ (79:14), ‘It is the earth. Ubayy ibn Abi-ṣ-Ṣalt
said, “They have flesh from the sea and flesh from land (sāhirah).”’ Ibn al-
Anbārī said that transmitters relate this verse:
In it is both flesh from the land (sāhirah) and from the sea.
What they say remains for them.
Nāfi‘ ibn al-Azraq said to Ibn ‘Abbās, ‘Tell me about the words of Allah,

 “He is not subject to drowsiness (sinah) or sleep.” (2:255) What is sinah?’ He
replied, ‘Drowsiness. Zuhayr ibn Abī Sulmā said:
He was not overcome by drowsiness (sinah) in the long nights
and did not sleep. There is no weakness in his business.

 What is reported about the excellence of tafsīr of the Qur’an and
those who do it
Our scholars say that part of what is transmitted from the Companions
and Followers about the excellence of tafsīr is that ‘Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib
mentioned Jābir ibn ‘Abdullāh and described him as having knowledge. A
man said to him, ‘May I be your ransom! You describe Jābir as having
knowledge when you are who are you are!’ He replied, ‘He knew the tafsīr of
the words of Allah, “He who has imposed the Qur’an upon you will most certainly
bring you back home again.” (28:85)’ Mujāhid said, ‘The dearest of creatures to
Allah Almighty is the one who has the most knowledge of what is revealed.’
Al-Ḥasan said, ‘Allah has not revealed any āyah without wanting people to
know why it was revealed and what it means.’ Ash-Sha‘bī said, ‘Masrūq
travelled to Basra for the tafsīr of an āyah and was told that the one who
could explain it had travelled to Syria. So he made preparations and
travelled to Syria to learn its tafsīr.’
‘Ikrimah said about the words of the Almighty, ‘If anyone leaves his home,
making hijrah to Allah and His Messenger’ (4:99), ‘I sought the name of this man
“who leaves his home, making hijrah to Allah and His Messenger” for fourteen years
until I found it.’ Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr said that it was Ḍamrah ibn Ḥabīb. Ibn
‘Abbās said, ‘I remained for two years wanting to ask ‘Umar about the two
women who helped each other against the Messenger of Allah g and only
awe of him prevented me from asking. Finally I asked him and he replied
that it was Ḥafṣah and ‘Ā’ishah.’ Iyās ibn Mu‘āwiyah said, ‘The metaphor
of those who recite the Qur’an without knowing its tafsīr is that of some
people to whom a letter comes from their king at night when they have no
lamp. They are alarmed, not knowing what the letter contains. The
metaphor of the one who knows the tafsīr is that of a man who brings them
a lamp so that they can read what the letter says.’

 What is reported about the one who is a bearer of the Qur’an,
who he is and those who are hostile to him
Abū ‘Umar said, ‘It is related by various paths that the Prophet g said,
“An aspect of esteem for Allah is honouring three: a just ruler, a Muslim
with white hair and a bearer of the Qur’an who is neither excessive in it nor
turns away from it.’ Abū ‘Umar said that the bearers of the Qur’an are
those who know its rulings, its lawful and unlawful and act by what it
contains. Anas reported that the Messenger of Allah g said, ‘The Qur’an is
better than everything. Whoever respects the Qur’an has respected Allah.
Whoever makes light of the Qur’an has made light of the right of Allah
Almighty. The bearers of the Qur’an are those who are encircled by the
mercy of Allah, exalting the Word of Allah, touched by the light of Allah.
Allah befriends whoever befriends them, and Allah is hostile to whoever is
hostile to them; such people have made light of the right of Allah.’

 The respect and esteem for the Qur’an which is mandatory for
someone who recites and bears the Qur’an
In Nawādir al-uṣūl, at-Tirmidhī al-Ḥakīm said, ‘An aspect of respect for the
Qur’an is to only touch it when you are in a state of purity. Another aspect
of respect for it is to recite it in a state of purity. Yet another aspect of respect
for it is to use the tooth-stick (siwāk), clean between the teeth and make the
mouth clean, as the mouth is its pathway. Yazīd ibn Abī Mālik said, “Your
mouths are the pathways of the Qur’an, so purify and clean them as much
as you can.”
‘Part of respect for it is to dress as you would dress to visit the ruler when
you want to speak privately to him. Part of respect for it is to face qiblah
when you recite it. When Abu-l-‘Aliyyah recited he would put on a turban,
dress, wear a cloak and face qiblah. Part of respect for it is to rinse your
mouth when you spit. Shu‘bah reported from Abū Ḥamzah from Ibn
‘Abbās that he had a spittoon in front of him and when he spat, he would
rinse his mouth and then begin recitation. Whenever he spat, he rinsed. Part
of respect for it is that when you yawn, you should stop reciting, because
when one recites, one is addressing and conversing with the Lord. Yawning
is from Shayṭān. Mujāhid said, “When you yawn while reciting the Qur’an,
stop reciting out of respect until you stop yawning.” ‘Ikrimah said, “By that
he meant to respect the Qur’an.”
‘Part of respect for it is to seek refuge with Allah from the accursed Shayṭān
when starting to recite it. You should say “In the Name of Allah, the All-Merciful,
the Most Merciful” when beginning to recite it from the first sūrah or from
wherever you start. Part of respect for it is that, when you begin to recite it,
you should not stop for a time to speak to people without need. Part of
respect for it is that you should not stop reciting it when someone interrupts
you by speaking to you and mix recitation with your reply. That is because
when you do that, you remove the effectiveness of the formula of seeking
refuge that you uttered at the beginning. Part of respect for it is to recite it
deliberately, slowly and carefully.
‘Part of respect for it is to deploy your mind and intelligence in
understanding what is addressed to you. Part of respect for it is to stop at an
āyah of promise and have hope in Allah and ask Him for His bounty, and to
stop at an āyah of warning and seek refuge with Allah from the threat. Part

 of respect for it is to stop at its metaphors and visualise them. Part of respect
for it is to investigate its unusual words. Part of respect for it is to give every
letter its due so that the words are fully articulated and then you will receive
ten good deeds for every letter.
‘Part of respect for it is to end its recitation by proclaiming the truthfulness
of its Lord and testifying to its delivery by His Messenger g and testifying
that that is true. You say:
 ،َǗǒِĻِŅĤ Ùّśŋا َŐِŎ َِ̌ َ̉ذ ƪَ Ʃَ ɻ ُŐْɌَɬَو ،َُُ̑̎Řُر ْĬَĪÙّŌَ İَو ،ĤَǀÙّȢَر َĬْļَĻَŔ
ØِŜْŚِĽْŋĤِʘ َɄȾِ ǷِǱĤَĽْŋا ،ِّőَ ǈْŰا ِءاَĻَُ̇ ʁ َŐِŎ Ĥَ ķْŌَīْŁا ÙّōُņÙّ̊̉ا
“You have spoken the Truth O our Lord, and His Messengers conveyed it
and we testify to that. O Allah, make us among the witnesses to the Truth,
establishing justice.” Then you make supplication.
‘Part of respect for it is that when you recite, you do not take āyahs
piecemeal from each sūrah and recite them. It is related to us that the
Messenger of Allah g passed by Bilāl who was reciting a little from each
sūrah and he commanded him to recite the entire sūrah.
‘Part of respect for it is that when you put down a copy of the Qur’an, you
do not leave it open and do you not put any other book on top of it. It
should always be on top of any other books, be they books of knowledge or
other books. Part of respect for it is that when you recite, you put it in your
lap or on top of something in front of you and do not put it on the ground.
Part of respect for it is not to erase the board it is written on with spit, but
rather use water. Part of respect for it is that when it is washed with water
you avoid impurities from various places and in the places where it is put.
That washing is respect. Some of the Salaf before us used to use that water
to heal themselves. Part of respect for it is to not take a page when it is worn
out and brittle out of fear for the writing. That is great coarseness. It should
be erased with water.
‘Part of respect for it is to not let a day pass without looking at least once at
the Qur’an. Abū Mūsā used to say, “I am ashamed not to look once a day at
the contract of my Lord.” Part of respect for it is to give the eyes their share
of it. The eye leads to the self. Between the self and the breast is a veil and
the Qur’an is in the breast. When you recite it by heart the ear listens and

 conveys it to the self. When you look at its writing, the eye and the ear both
convey it. That is more likely to achieve the conveyance. Then the eye has
its share just as the ear does. Zayd ibn Aslam reported from ‘Aṭā’ ibn Yasār
from Abū Sa‘īd al-Khudrī that the Messenger of Allah g said, “Give the
eyes their portion of worship.” They asked. “Messenger of Allah, what is
their portion of worship?” He replied, “To look at the Qur’an and reflect on
it and study its wonders.” Makḥūl reported from ‘Ubādah ibn aṣ-Ṣāmit that
the Messenger of Allah g said, “The best worship of my community is to
read the Qur’an with the eyes.”
‘Part of respect for it is not to resort to it when offered worldly goods. ‘Amr
ibn Ziyād al-Ḥanẓalī related from Hushaym ibn Bashīr from al-Mughīrah
that Ibrāhīm [an-Nakha‘ī] used to dislike to resort to any of the Qur’an
when he was offered worldly goods. That is like saying to a man who comes
to you, “You have arrived at the pre-ordained time, Mūsā,” (20:40) and like saying,
“Eat and drink with relish for what you did before in days gone by” (69:24) when food
is served, and other such things. Part of respect for it is not to say Sūrat an-
Naḥl, Sūrat al-Baqarah and Sūrat an-Nisā’, but to say, “The sūrah in which
such-and-such is mentioned.”’
I say that this, however, is contrary to the words of the Prophet g, “If
anyone recites the two āyahs from the end of Sūrat al-Baqarah at night, they
will be enough for him.” Al-Bukhārī and Muslim transmitted it from
‘Abdullāh ibn Mas‘ūd.
‘Part of respect for it is to not invert it, as some teachers of children do, in
order to show off cleverness and fluency. That is opposition to Allah. Part of
respect for it is to not exaggerate its recitation as is done by those obstinate
innovators who intensify the pronunciation of the hamzah and pronounce
words with affectation. That is an innovation which Shayṭān suggested to
them that they accepted. Part of respect for it is not to recite it using musical
tunes like the tunes of the people of depravity nor with the quavering of the
Christians nor chanting of the monks. All of that is deviation.
‘Part of respect for it is to make its letters bold. Abū Ḥukaymah reported
that he used to copy out Qur’an in Kufa. ‘Alī passed by him, inspected his
writing and ordered, “Make your pen thicker.” He said, “So I took the pen
and trimmed part of it and then wrote while ‘Alī was standing and looking at
my writing. He said, ‘Like that. Give light to it as Allah gave it light.’”
‘Part of respect for it is not to compete in loudness in recitation so that it

 becomes spoiled for the other and he hates what he hears and it becomes
like a contest. Part of respect for it is not to argue or quarrel about its
recitations or say to a person, “It is not like that.” Perhaps that recitation is a
sound and permitted one and then you would be denying the Book of Allah.
‘Part of respect for it is not to recite it in the market or in places of clamour,
worthless talk, and the places where fools congregate. Do you not see that
Allah Almighty mentioned the slaves of the All-Merciful and praised them
because, when they pass by worthless talk, they pass by it with dignity? (cf.
25:72) This is about simply passing by those engaged in worthless talk. So
how could they recite the Qur’an in the midst of worthless talk and a
gathering of fools?
‘Part of respect for it is not to use it as pillow or lean on it or throw it to
someone when he wants it to be passed to him.
‘Part of respect for it is not to make it small. … It is reported that ‘Alī said,
“Do not make the Qur’an small.” It is related that ‘Umar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb
saw a small Qur’an in the hand of a man and asked, “Who wrote it?” “I
did,” he replied, and then ‘Umar struck him with his whip and said,
“Esteem the Qur’an.” It is related that the Prophet g forbade people to say,
‘a little mosque or a little Qur’an” (using the diminutive).
‘Part of respect for it is not to mix it with what is not part of it. Part of
respect for it is not to adorn it with gold or write it in gold so that it is mixed
with the adornment of this world. Mughīrah related that Ibrāhīm disliked
adorning the Qur’an or writing it with gold or putting marks at the
beginning of āyahs or making it small. It is related from Abu-d-Dardā’ that
the Messenger of Allah g said, “When you adorn your mosque and
decorate your Qur’an, then ruin is upon you.” When Ibn ‘Abbās saw a
Qur’an adorned with silver he said, “You tempt the thief with it. Its
adornment is inside it.”
‘Part of respect for it is that it should not be written on the ground or on a
wall as is done in modern mosques. Muḥammad ibn ‘Alī ash-Shaqīqī related
from his father from ‘Abdullāh ibn al-Mubārak from Sufyān from
Muḥammad ibn az-Zubayr who heard ‘Umar ibn ‘Abd al-‘Azīz say, “The
Messenger of Allah g passed by some writing on the ground and said to a
lad of the tribe of Hudhayl, ‘What is this?’ He replied, ‘It is from the Book
of Allah. A Jew wrote it.’ He said, ‘May Allah curse the one who did this.
Only put the Book of Allah in its proper place.’” Muḥammad ibn az-Zubayr

 said that ‘Umar ibn ‘Abd al-‘Azīz saw a son of his writing the Qur’an on a
wall and beat him.
‘Part of respect for it is that when its writing is washed for treating an
illness, it should not be poured on a rubbish heap or in a place of impurity
or in a place where people walk, but in a place where people do not walk, or
a hole should be dug in a pure place so that it can be poured into it, or it
can be poured into a large river.
‘Part of respect for it is that, whenever someone completes the recitation of
the entire Qur’an, he recites some of the beginning so that it does not have
the form of something abandoned. That is why when the Messenger of
Allah g finished reciting, he would recite about five āyahs from the
beginning so that it would not be in an abandoned form. Ibn ‘Abbās said
that a man came and asked, “Messenger of Allah, which action is best?” He
replied, “You should be in a state of embarkation.” “What is a state of
embarkation?” he asked. He replied, “The one with the Qur’an who starts
from its beginning until he reaches its end and then starts again at the
beginning. Whenever he alights, he immediately travels on.”’
‘It is recommended to gather your family when you finish the Qur’an. Abū
Bakr al-Anbārī reported from Idrīs from Khalaf from Wakī‘ from Mis‘ar
from Qatādah that when Anas ibn Mālik finished reciting the Qur’an, he
would gather his family and make supplication. Idrīs reported from Khalaf
from Jarīr from Manṣūr from al-Ḥakam that when Mujāhid, ‘Abdah ibn Abī
Lubābah and various people were about to complete the recitation, they
would summon people since mercy descends at the completion of the
Qur‘an. Idrīs reported from Khalaf from Hushaym from al-‘Awwām that
Ibrāhīm at-Taymī said, “When someone finishes the Qur’an at the
beginning of the day, the angels bless him until evening. When someone
finishes the Qur’an at the beginning of the night, the angels bless him until
morning.” He said, “They recommended that it should be finished at the
beginning of the night or at the beginning of the day.”
‘Part of respect for it is that you should not write the refuge sūrahs from it
and then enter the lavatory unless they are inside a covering of leather or
silver or something else. Then it is as if it were inside his breast.
‘Part of respect for it is that when you write it out [for medicinal purposes]
and then drink it, you should say the Name of Allah for every breath and
have a very strong intention. Allah will give to you according to your

 intention. Mujāhid said, “There is no harm in writing out the Qur’an and
then having a sick person drink it.” Abū Ja‘far said, “If someone has
hardness in his heart, he should write ‘Yāsīn’ on a goblet with saffron and
drink it.”’
I say that part of respect for it is not to say, ‘What a short sūrah!’ Abu-
l-‘Aliyyah disliked saying ‘What a short or long sūrah’. When he heard
someone say that, he would retort, ‘You are smaller than it. All of the
Qur’an is immense.’ Abū Dāwūd related the contrary of this from the
hadith of ‘Amr ibn Shu‘ayb from his grandfather which states that one can
use those terms. ‘Amr said, ‘No small or long sūrah is part of the Mufaṣṣal.’

 What is reported regarding threats against engaging in tafsīr of
the Qur’an by means of opinion (ra’y) or being bold in doing that,
and the ranks of the commentators
It is related that ‘Ā’ishah said, ‘The Messenger of Allah g did not explain
the meaning of the Book of Allah except for some āyahs which Jibrīl
explained to him.’ Ibn ‘Aṭiyyah said, ‘The meaning of this hadith is that it is
about the unseen things of the Qur’an, explaining what is undefined (mujmal)
and the like, which there is no way to uncover except with Allah’s help. An
aspect of that are those unseen matters which Allah has not made known,
such as the time of the Rising and the number of blasts on the Trumpet and
the order of the creation of the heavens and the earth.’
At-Tirmidhī reported from Ibn ‘Abbās that the Prophet g said, ‘Fear
attributing words to me of which you have no knowledge. Anyone who
deliberately tells a lie regarding me will take his seat in the Fire. Anyone
who speaks about the Qur’an from his own opinion, will take his seat in the
Fire.’ It is also reported from Jundub that the Messenger of Allah g said,
‘Anyone who speaks about the Qur’an according to his own opinion and is
right is still wrong.’ This is a gharīb hadith which Abū Dāwūd transmitted,
and one of its transmitters is questionable. Razīn added, ‘Whoever speaks by
his opinion and errs has disbelieved.’
Abū Bakr Muḥammad ibn Bashshār ibn Muḥammad al-Anbārī, the
linguist and grammarian, said in the Kitāb ar-radd, ‘There are two
interpretations of the hadith of Ibn ‘Abbās. One is that someone who speaks
on problematic things (mushkil) in the Qur’an without proper knowledge,
differing from the position of the first Companions and Tābi‘ūn, exposes
himself to the anger of Allah. The second, which is the firmer and sounder
of the two, is that when someone says something about the Qur’an knowing
the truth to be different, he should take his seat in the Fire.’
Regarding the hadith of Jundub, some of the people of knowledge say that
‘opinion’ here means ‘whim’. Whoever speaks about the Qur’an according
to his own whims and does not take from the Imams of the Salaf and
happens to be right is still wrong since he has judged the Qur’an by
something whose basis is not recognised and is not based on the position of
those with expertise in traditions and transmission. Ibn ‘Aṭiyyah says, ‘The
meaning of this is that a man is asked about a meaning of the Book of Allah

 and hurries to explain it by his own opinion without looking at what the
scholars have said and what the rules of knowledge like syntax and
fundamental principles demand.’ Not included is the explanation of
grammarians and linguists of its grammar and the fuqahā’ of its meaning
where each speaks by his ijtihād based on the rules of his own branch of
knowledge and research.
This is sound and more than one scholar prefers it. The one who speaks
according to what pops into his imagination and occurs to his mind without
seeking evidence for it in the fundamental principles errs. Anyone who
derives its meanings by basing himself on the fundamental principles, which
are agreed upon, is praised.
Some scholars have said that tafsīr is dependent on oral transmission since
Allah says, ‘If you have a dispute about something, refer it back to Allah and His
Messenger.’ (4:59) This is false because the prohibition against explaining the
Qur’an is either that what is desired is to confine oneself to transmission and
not investigate, or it is something else. It is false that what is meant is that no
one should say anything about the Qur’an other than what he has heard.
The Companions recited the Qur’an and differed about its interpretation in
some cases. Not all of what they said was what they heard from the Prophet
g. The Prophet g made supplication for Ibn ‘Abbās and said, ‘O Allah,
give him understanding in the dīn and teach him interpretation.’ If
interpretation is confined to Revelation and Prophetic reports, what is the
point of singling him out for it? This is clear and undoubted.
The prohibition against tafsīr applies in two instances. The first is when the
interpreter voices an opinion about something on the basis of his own
nature and passion and, therefore, interprets the Qur’an according to his
opinion and passion in an effort to justify his position. If it had not been for
that opinion and passion, that meaning about the Qur’an would not have
occurred to him. This can sometimes be conscious, as in the case of
someone who uses some āyahs of the Qur’an to prove the validity of an
innovation, when he knows that that is not what is meant by the āyah, but his
aim is to confuse his opponent. Sometimes it is done in ignorance which
may happen when an āyah can be applied in various ways and his
understanding inclines to the meaning which coincides with his position. He
prefers that interpretation because of his own opinion and passion and so he
interprets it according to his own opinion. If it had not been for his opinion,

 he would not have preferred that meaning.
Sometimes someone has a sound purpose and seeks evidence for it in the
Qur’an and uses what he knows of it as evidence for what he wants to
convey, like the one who calls people to strive against a hard heart. Allah
says, “Go to Pharaoh. He has overstepped the bounds.” (20:23) He points to his
heart and suggests that that is what is meant by ‘Pharaoh’ in this āyah. This
kind of interpretation is used by some preachers with good motives to make
their words effective and encourage their listeners. It is forbidden because it
is unacceptable linguistic analogy and is not permissible. The esotericists use
the same method to false purposes with the goal of deluding people and
calling them to their false beliefs. They use the Qur’an according to their
opinion and position in matters that they absolutely know are not meant.
This is one of the aspects of tafsīr that is forbidden.
The second instance is when an interpreter hastens to explain the Qur’an
according to the literal meaning of the Arabic without the help of
transmission about what the unusual words of the Qur’an mean and what
has been passed down about the ambiguous and interchangeable words,
conciseness, elision, concealment and reversal of order it contains. Someone
who does not have a firm grasp of the literal tafsīr and then sets out to derive
meanings by simple understanding of Arabic often errs and joins the
company of those who interpret the Qur’an according to their own
opinions.
Transmission is necessary first of all in the primary tafsīr so that one avoids
error, and then after that one employs understanding and deduction to
expand on it. The unusual words, which are only understood via
transmission, are numerous and one cannot hope to reach the inward
before having a firm grasp of the outward. Do you not see that the Almighty
says: ‘We gave Thamūd the camel as a visible sign (mubṣirah) and then they mistreated
her’ (17:59)? It means a visible sign, and they wronged themselves by killing
it. Someone who looks at the literal Arabic might think that it means that
the camel could see (mubṣirah) and therefore not know what they did wrong
and how they wronged others and themselves. This is an example of elision
and concealment. There are many such examples in the Qur’an. In cases
other than these two, there is no prohibition against interpretation, and
Allah knows best.
Ibn ‘Aṭiyyah said, ‘Most of the righteous Salaf like Sa‘īd ibn al-Musayyab,

 ‘Āmir ash-Sha‘bī and others used to be overawed at the prospect of making
interpretation of the Qur’an and would refrain from it out of scrupulousness
and caution for themselves in spite of their perfection and precedence.’ Abū
Bakr al-Anbārī said, ‘The imams of the Salaf were too scrupulous to explain
the problematic parts of the Qur’an. One of them supposed that his tafsīr
might not coincide with what Allah meant and so refrained from speaking.
Another feared that he would become an imam in tafsīr and people might
follow his method, when he might hesitate to explain a single letter
according to his own opinion or to err about it and then his follower might
say, “My imam in the tafsīr of the Qur’an by opinion is so-and-so, the imam
of the Salaf.” Ibn Abī Mulaykah said, “Abū Bakr aṣ-Ṣiddīq was asked about
the tafsīr of a letter of the Qur’an and said, ‘Which heaven will cover me and
which earth will bear me? Where will I go? What will I do if I say about a
letter of the Book of Allah other than what Allah Almighty meant?’”’
Ibn ‘Aṭiyyah said, ‘Several of the Salaf used to explain the Qur’an and
caused the Muslims to continue doing that. As for the original
commentators on whom they relied, there was ‘Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib, and he
was followed by ‘Abdullāh ibn ‘Abbās, who devoted himself to the subject
and perfected it. He was followed by scholars like Mujāhid, Sa‘īd ibn Jubayr
and others. More is transmitted from him than has been preserved from ‘Alī.
Ibn ‘Abbās said, “What I grasped of tafsīr of the Qur’an was from ‘Alī ibn
Abī Ṭālib.” ‘Alī used to praise the tafsīr of Ibn ‘Abbās and encouraged people
to take it from him. Ibn Mas‘ūd used to say, “An excellent translator of the
Qur’an is ‘Abdullāh ibn ‘Abbās.” ‘Alī said about him, “It is as if Ibn ‘Abbās
looks at the unseen through a fine curtain.”
‘He was followed up by ‘Abdullāh ibn Mas‘ūd, Ubayy ibn Ka‘b, Zayd ibn
Thābit, and ‘Abdullāh ibn ‘Amr ibn al-‘Āṣ. All that is taken from the
Companions has preference because they witnessed the Revelation and its
coming down in their language. ‘Āmir ibn Wāthilah said, “I saw ‘Alī ibn Abī
Ṭālib speaking. I heard him say in his khuṭbah, ‘Ask me. By Allah, you will
not ask me about anything that will happen until the Day of Rising but that
I will tell you about it. Ask me about the Book of Allah. By Allah, there is no
āyah but that I know whether it was revealed at night or in the day, revealed
on flat ground or on a mountain.’” Ibn al-Kawwā’ rose and asked about
Sūrat adh-Dhāriyāt (51).
‘‘Abdullāh ibn Mas‘ūd said, “If I knew of anyone with more knowledge of

 the Book of Allah than me, who could be reached by riding, I would go to
him.” A man asked him, “Have you not met ‘Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib?” “Yes,” he
replied, “I have met him.” Masrūq said, “I found some of the Companions
of Muḥammad like pools which give water to one person, some like pools
which give water to two, and some who are such that if all people came to it,
it would satisfy their thirst. ‘Abdullāh ibn Mas‘ūd was one those pools.”
‘Abū Sa‘īd al-Khudrī reported that the Messenger of Allah g said, “The
most merciful to my community is Abū Bakr, the strongest in the dīn of
Allah is ‘Umar, the most truly modest is ‘Uthmān, the one with the most
knowledge of judgement is ‘Alī, and the one with most knowledge of the
shares of inheritance is Zayd. The one with the most recitation of the Book
of Allah is Ubayy ibn Ka‘b. The one with the most knowledge of the lawful
and unlawful is Mu‘ādh ibn Jabal. The trustworthy representative of this
community is Abū ‘Ubaydah ibn al-Jarrāḥ. Abū Hurayrah is a vessel of
knowledge and Salmān is a sea of knowledge which is not perceived.
Vegetation has not shaded nor has the earth supported anyone with a more
truthful tongue than Abū Dharr.”’
Ibn ‘Aṭiyyah said, ‘The prominent Followers (Tābi‘ūn) included al-Ḥasan al-
Baṣrī, Mujāhid, Sa‘īd ibn Jubayr and ‘Alqamah. Mujāhid studied recitation
with Ibn ‘Abbās, coupled with understanding the meaning, stopping at every
āyah. ‘Ikrimah and aḍ-Ḍaḥḥāk followed them. Even if aḍ-Ḍaḥḥāk did not
meet Ibn ‘Abbās, he studied with Ibn Jubayr. As for as-Suddī, ‘Āmir ash-
Sha‘bī attacked him and Abū Ṣāliḥ because he thought that they fell short
in careful investigation.’
Yaḥyā ibn Ma‘īn said that al-Kalbī is nothing. Yaḥyā ibn Sa‘īd al-Qaṭṭān
related from Sufyān that al-Kalbī said that Abū Ṣāliḥ said, ‘All that I have
related to you is a lie.’ Ḥabīb ibn Abī Thābit said, ‘We used to call him “the
Liar”. He was Abū Ṣāliḥ, the freedman of Umm Hāni’.’
Then the tafsīr was transmitted by men of integrity of every generation. As
the Prophet g said, ‘This knowledge will be carried by men of integrity of
every generation, discarding from it the deviation of the excessive, the
ascriptions of the falsifiers and the interpretation of the ignorant.’ Abū
‘Umar and others related it. Al-Khaṭīb al-Baghdādī said, ‘This testimony
from the Messenger of Allah g shows that Qur’anic interpreters are
scholars of the dīn and imams of the Muslims because they guard the
Sharī‘ah against deviation and the ascription of falsehood and refute the

 interpretation of ignorant fools. One must consult them and rely on them in
the matter of the dīn.’
Ibn ‘Aṭiyyah said, ‘Then things were written about it by people like ‘Abd
ar-Razzāq, al-Mufaḍḍal, ‘Alī ibn Abī Ṭalḥah, al-Bukhārī and others. Then
Muḥammad ibn Jarīr collected disparate commentaries from people. He
brought close that which was far and mended the isnād. The eminent later
commentators include Abū Isḥāq az-Zajjāj and Abū ‘Alī al-Fārisī. People
often correct Abū Bakr an-Naqqāsh and Abū Ja‘far an-Naḥḥās. Makkī ibn
Abī Ṭālib followed their custom. Abu-l-‘Abbās al-Mahdawī was a precise
author. All of them strove and are rewarded. May Allah have mercy on
them and illuminate their faces.’

 The Book being explained by the Sunnah, and what has been
transmitted about that
Allah says: ‘And We have sent down the Reminder to you so that you can make clear to
mankind what has been sent down to them’ (16:44), and: ‘Those who oppose his
command should beware of a testing trial coming to them or a painful punishment striking
them’ (24:59) and: ‘Truly you are guiding to a Straight Path.’ (42:49) The
obligation of obeying the Prophet g is made clear in more than one āyah of
Allah’s Book and it is connected to obedience to Allah. Allah says: ‘Whatever
the Messenger gives you you should accept and whatever He forbids you you should forgo.’
(59:7) Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr mentioned in the Book of Knowledge that ‘Abd ar-
Raḥmān ibn Yazīd saw a muḥrim wearing his ordinary clothes and he
forbade him to do that. The man said to him, ‘Bring me an āyah from the
Book of Allah which removes my clothes.’ He recited to him, ‘Whatever the
Messenger gives you you should accept and whatever He forbids you you should forgo.’
(59:7) Hishām ibn Ḥujayr said, ‘Ṭāwūs prayed two rak‘ahs after ‘Aṣr and Ibn
‘Abbās said, “Stop doing them.” He answered, “It is only forbidden to take
them as a sunnah.” Ibn ‘Abbās said, “The Messenger of Allah g forbade
praying after ‘Aṣr. I do not know whether you will be punished or rewarded
for them, because Allah says, ‘When Allah and His Messenger have decided a thing
it is not for any believing man or believing woman to have a choice about it.’ (33:36)”’
Abū Dāwūd related from al-Miqdām ibn Ma‘dikarīb that the Messenger of
Allah g said, ‘I was given the Book and its like along with it. It will not be
long before a satiated man on his couch declares, “This Qur’an is all you
need. Make lawful whatever you find lawful in it and make unlawful
whatever you find unlawful in it.” But domestic donkeys are not lawful for
you, nor is eating any beast of prey with fangs, nor is something dropped by
someone who has a treaty with you lawful to you, until its owner declares
himself free of it. If someone stops with some people, they must give him
hospitality. If they do not, he can legally pursue them for the equivalent cost
of his due hospitality.’
Al-Khaṭṭābi said that the words ‘I was given the Book and its like along
with it’ can be interpreted in two ways. One is that it means he was given
hidden revelation, which is not recited, in the same way that he was given
the outward recited part. The second is that he was given the Book as
recited revelation and was given its equivalent in clarification of it, meaning

 permission to explain what was in the Book, making it general and specific,
adding to it and legislating what is in it. Therefore it is as mandatory to act
by that and to accept it as the outward recited Qur’an. This hadith is a
warning against opposing those established sunnahs which are not in the
Qur’an, as the Kharijites and Rafidites did. They attached themselves to the
literal text of the Qur’an and abandoned those sunnahs which contain the
clarification of the Book. Therefore they were confused and misguided. The
word for ‘couch’ in the hadith is ‘arīkah’. It is only used for one with a
curtained canopy and therefore it means the people of luxury and wealth
who remain in their homes without bothering to seek for knowledge where
it is expected to find it. This hadith contains evidence that there is no need
to measure the hadith against the Book. Whatever is confirmed as being
from the Prophet is evidence in itself. As for what some relate, ‘When a
hadith comes to you, measure it against the Book. If it agrees with it, take it.
Otherwise, discard it,’ it is a baseless false hadith.
This clarification is of two types: a general clarification of something
undefined in the Book, like clarifying the five prayers, their times,
prostration, rukū‘ and all their rulings, the amount and time of zakāt and the
types of property from which it is taken, and the practices of ḥajj. When the
Prophet g performed the ḥajj with the people, he said, ‘Take your practices
from me,’ and he said, ‘Pray as you saw me praying.’ Al-Bukhārī transmitted
it. ‘Imrān ibn Ḥuṣayn said to a man, ‘You stupid man! Do you find Ẓuhr in
the Book of Allah as four rak‘ahs in which recitation is not aloud!’ Then he
enumerated for him the prayer, zakāt and the like and then said, ‘Do you
find this explained in the Book of Allah? The Book of Allah Almighty did
not define this; it is the Sunnah that explains it!’
Al-Awzā‘ī reported that Ḥassān ibn ‘Aṭiyyah said, ‘Revelation descended
on the Messenger of Allah g and Jibrīl brought him the Sunnah which
explains it.’ Sa‘īd ibn Manṣūr related from ‘Īsā ibn Yūnus from al-Awzā‘ī
and also reported that Makḥūl said, ‘The Qur’an is more in need of the
Sunnah than the Sunnah is of the Qur’an.’ Yaḥyā ibn Abī Kathīr said, ‘The
Sunnah judges the Book and the Book does not judge the Sunnah.’ Al-
Fuḍayl ibn Ziyād said that he heard Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal being asked about
this hadith and he said, ‘I am not so bold as to say that, but I do say that the
Sunnah explains and clarifies the Book.’
Another area of clarification is augmentation of the rulings of the Book,

 like forbidding marrying a woman along with her maternal or paternal
aunt, forbidding the consumption of domestic donkeys and every beast of
prey with fangs, giving judgment based on an oath and a witness, and others
as will be explained in the text, Allah willing.

 How to learn and understand the Book of Allah and the Sunnah
of His Prophet g, and what has been narrated about it being
easier for someone who used to act by it without memorising it
In the Kitāb al-Bayān, Abū ‘Amr ad-Dānī reports from ‘Uthmān, Ibn
Mas‘ūd and Ubayy that the Messenger of Allah g used to recite ten āyahs to
them, and they did not go on to another ten until they knew what action
was connected to those āyahs. So we should learn the Qur’an and how to act
by it at the same time. ‘Abd ar-Razzāq mentioned from Ma‘mar from ‘Aṭā’
ibn as-Sā’ib that ‘Abd ar-Raḥmān as-Sulamī said, ‘When we learned ten
āyahs of the Qur’an, we did not learn the ten after them until we knew what
they contained of the lawful and unlawful, of prohibitions and commands.’
In the Muwaṭṭā’, Mālik reported that he heard that ‘Abdullāh ibn ‘Umar
spent eight years learning Sūrat al-Baqarah. In his book, The Names of Those
who Transmitted from Mālik, Abū Bakr Aḥmad ibn ‘Alī ibn Thābit mentions
from Abū Bilāl Mirdās ibn Muḥammad al-Ash‘arī from Mālik that Nāfi‘
transmitted that Ibn ‘Umar said, ‘‘Umar learned al-Baqarah over twelve
years. When he finished, he slaughtered a camel.’ Al-Anbārī reports from
Muḥammad ibn Sharhiyār from Ḥusayn ibn al-Aswad from ‘Ubaydullāh
ibn Mūsā from Abū ‘Amr Ziyād ibn Abī Muslim from Ziyād ibn Mikhrāq
that ‘Abdullāh ibn Mas‘ūd said, ‘It was difficult for us to memorise the
words of the Qur’an, but easy for us to act by them. After us there will be
people for whom it is easy to memorise the Qur’an, but hard to act by it.’
Ibrāhīm ibn Mūsā related from Yūsuf ibn Mūsā from al-Faḍl ibn Dukayn
from Ismā‘īl ibn Ibrāhīm ibn al-Muhājir from his father from Mujāhid that
Ibn ‘Umar said, ‘The best of the Companions of the Messenger of Allah at
the beginning of this Community only memorised a sūrah or two of the
Qur’an. They were given the gift of acting by the Qur’an. The last of this
community will recite the Qur’an – children and blind – and will not be
given the gift of acting by it.’ Abū Muḥammad Ḥasan ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhāb
ibn Abi-l-‘Anbar from Abū Bakr ibn Ḥammād al-Muqrī’ who heard Khalaf
ibn Hishām al-Bazzār say, ‘I only think that in our hands the Qur’an has
been denuded [of action]. That is because we were told that ‘Umar ibn al-
Khatṭṭāb memorised Sūrat al-Baqarah over the course of about ten years.
When he had memorised it, he slaughtered a camel to thank Allah. In our
time, a boy sits before me and recites a third of the Qur’an without missing

 out a single letter. I only reckon that the Qur’an is denuded in our hands.’
Those with knowledge of hadith say that the person who seeks hadiths
should not confine himself to listening to hadiths and reading their books
without recognition and understanding. To do otherwise would mean tiring
himself out with little result. His memorisation of hadiths should be
undertaken gradually over nights and days. Among the masters of hadith
from whom that is reported are Shu‘bah, Ibn ‘Ulayyah and Ma‘mar.
Ma‘mar said that he heard az-Zuhrī say, ‘Someone who seeks knowledge all
at once loses out on all of it. Knowledge is acquired one or two hadiths at a
time. Allah knows best.’ Mu‘ādh ibn Jabal said, ‘Learn what you wish, but
Allah will not reward you for it as long as you do not act on it.’ Ibn ‘Abd al-
Barr said, ‘Something similar to what Mu‘ādh said is related from the
Prophet g from ‘Ubbād ibn ‘Abd aṣ-Ṣamad which adds, ‘The concern of
scholars is comprehension and the concern of fools is mere transmission.’ It
is related mawqūf and is more fitting than the transmission which is marfū‘.
‘Ubbād ibn ‘Abd aṣ-Ṣamad is not authoritative. There is an excellent poem
on the excellence of knowledge and the honour of the Noble Book and
Splendid Sunnah:
Even if the beauties of knowledge are majestic,
their crown is that in which belief is mandatory:
The Noble Book which Allah preserves.
After that is a knowledge that allays anxiety.
That is the hadiths of the Chosen, containing the light of Prophethood,
the Sunnah of Sharī‘ah and good manners.
After this is knowledge without end.
So test yourself, you who prefer to seek.
Knowledge is a treasure which you will find in its mine.
Seeker! Study and look at books!
Recite the Book of Allah with understanding:
it contains all forms of knowledge. Reflect and you will see a marvel!
Read and you will be guided to the hadith of the Chosen.
Ask your Master for what you desire and your hope will be achieved.
Whoever tastes the knowledge of the dīn delights in it.
When he has more of it, he says, ‘O joy!’

 The meaning of the words of the Prophet g, “The Qur’an was
revealed in seven aḥruf (dialects/modes).”
In Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim, Ubayy ibn Ka‘b reported that the Prophet g was with the
Banū Ghifār when Jibrīl came to him and said, ‘Allah commands you to
recite the Qur’an to your Community in one mode.’ He said, ‘I ask Allah
for His pardon and forgiveness. My Community will not be able to do that.’
Then he came a second time and said, ‘Allah commands you to recite the
Qur’an to your Community in two modes.’ He said, ‘I ask Allah for His
pardon and forgiveness. My Community will not be able to do that.’ He
came a third time and said, ‘Allah commands you to recite the Qur’an to
your Community in three modes.’ He replied, ‘I ask Allah for His pardon
and forgiveness. My Community will not be able to do that.’ He came a
fourth time and said, ‘Allah commands you to recite the Qur’an to your
community in seven modes. Whichever mode they recite, it is correct.’ At-
Tirmidhī reported that Ubayy said, ‘The Messenger of Allah g met Jibrīl
and said, “Jibrīl, I was sent to an illiterate community. Some of them are old
women and old men, boys and girls, and men who do not read at all.” He
said to him, “Muḥammad, the Qur’an was revealed in seven modes.”’ He
said that this is a sound hadith. This story is confirmed by the main
authorities: al-Bukhārī, Muslim, the Muwaṭṭā’, Abū Dāwūd, an-Nasā’ī and
other books in the form of the story about Hishām ibn Ḥakīm with ‘Umar
which we will mention later.
Scholars disagree about what is meant by the seven modes, and there are
thirty-five things mentioned by Abū Ḥātim Muḥammad ibn Ḥibbān al-
Bustī. We will mention five of them here:
This is the position of most of the people of knowledge, such as Sufyān ibn
‘Uyaynah, ‘Abdullāh ibn Wahb, aṭ-Ṭabarī, aṭ-Ṭaḥāwī and others. What is
meant are the seven manners of synonyms with different expressions, like
aqbala, ta‘āla and halumma (all of which mean ‘come here’). Aṭ-Ṭaḥāwī said,
‘The clearest elucidation of that is what is mentioned in the hadith of Abū
Bakrah, “Jibrīl came to the Prophet g and said, ‘Recite in one mode.’
Mīkā’īl said, ‘Increase it.’ He said, ‘Recite it in two modes.’ Mīkā’īl said,
‘Increase it,’ until it was seven modes. He said, ‘Recite it. Each is adequate
unless you confuse an āyah of mercy for an āyah of punishment or an āyah of
punishment with an āyah of mercy.’” That is like halumma, ta‘āla, aqbala,

 adhhaba, asra‘a and ‘ajjala.’ Warqā’ related from Ibn Abī Najīḥ from Mujāhid
from Ibn ‘Abbās that Ubayy ibn Ka‘b used to recite ‘wait for us’ (57:13)
‘undhurūnā’ as ‘umhulūnā’, ‘akhkhirūnā’, and ‘arqubūnā’. With the same isnād, it is
reported that Ubayy recited in 2:19 ‘marrū’ instead of ‘mashaw’ and ‘sa‘aw’
(they walk). In al-Bukhārī, az-Zuhrī said, ‘These modes are about the same
matter. They do not differ in respect of the lawful and unlawful.’
Aṭ-Ṭaḥāwī said, ‘There was allowance for people in respect of the letters
since they were unable to take the Qur’an in other than their dialects
because they were illiterate and only a few of them could write. It was hard
for someone with a dialect to change to another. If he wanted to do that, it
would have entailed great hardship and so they were given scope regarding
different expressions as long as the meaning was the same. They remained
like that until many of them could write and the dialects reverted to that of
the Messenger of Allah g. Then they were able to memorise those words
and they no longer had the allowance to recite differently.’ Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr
said, ‘It is clear that scope for the seven modes was at a particular time out
of necessity. When that necessity was removed, the ruling of the seven was
removed, and the Qur’an was recited in one mode.’
Abū Dāwūd related that Ubayy said, ‘The Messenger of Allah g said to
me, “Ubayy, I recited the Qur’an and was asked whether to recite it in one
ḥarf or two. The angel who was with me told me to say, ‘In two.’ Then I was
asked whether to recite it in two or three ḥarfs. The angel who was with me
told me to say, ‘In three.’ This continued until it was seven.” Then he said,
“Any of these is comprehensive and sufficient. So you can say, ‘[Allah is] All-
Hearing, All-Knowing, Almighty, and Wise,’ as long as you do not muddle
an āyah of punishment with mercy or an āyah of mercy with punishment.”’
Ibn Mas‘ūd said something similar, Qāḍī Ibn aṭ-Ṭayyib said, ‘If this
transmission, namely the hadith of Ubayy, is confirmed, it can be assumed
that it was general and then abrogated. Now it is not permitted for people to
exchange the Names of Allah in different places whether or not that is in
keeping with the meaning.’
Second view. Some people say that the seven dialects in the Qur’an are the
seven dialects of all the Arabs, both Yemeni and Nizār, because the
Messenger of Allah g was not ignorant of any of them. He was ‘given
concise comprehensive words’. It does not mean that the one mode has
seven aspects, but these seven dialects are in different parts of the Qur’an.

 Some of it is in the dialect of Quraysh, some in that of Hudhayl, some in
Hawāzin, and some in Yemeni.
Al-Khaṭṭābi said that there is in the Qur’an that which is recited in seven
ways, which is His words, ‘and who worshipped false gods?’ (5:60) and His words,
‘Why don’t you send him out with us tomorrow so he can enjoy himself and play about?’
(12:12) [both of which have variant readings], and he mentioned other
examples, as if he took the position that some of the Qur’an was revealed in
seven modes, not all of it.
The Qur’an being revealed in seven modes, i.e. in seven dialects was the
position that Abū ‘Ubayd al-Qāsim ibn Sallām took and Ibn ‘Aṭiyyah
preferred it. Abū ‘Ubayd said, ‘Some tribes have a greater share of it than
others.’ Ibn Shihāb mentioned from Anas that when ‘Uthmān told them to
copy out the Qur’an, he said, ‘When you and Zayd differ, then write in the
dialect of Quraysh. It was revealed in their dialect.’ Al-Bukhārī mentioned it
and he also mentioned what Ibn ‘Abbās said: ‘The Qur’an was revealed in
the dialect of the two Ka‘bs: Ka‘b [ibn Lu’ayy] of Quraysh and Ka‘b [ibn
‘Amr] of Khuzā‘ah.’ He was asked, ‘How is that?’ He answered, ‘Because
they have the same abode.’ Abū ‘Ubayd said, ‘It means that Khuzā‘ah were
the neighbours of Quraysh and so adopted their dialect.’
Qāḍī Ibn aṭ-Ṭayyib [al-Baqillānī] said, ‘‘Uthmān’s words that it was
revealed in the dialect of Quraysh means that most of it was revealed in that
dialect. It is not a definitive proof that it is all in the dialect of Quraysh since
there are words and letters which differ from the dialect of Quraysh. Allah
says, ‘We have made it an Arabic Qur’an.’ (43:3) He did not say, ‘a Qurayshī
Qur’an’. This indicates that it was revealed in the language of all the Arabs,
and no one can say that it was just Quraysh or one part of the Arabs rather
than others. So one cannot say that it means the dialect of ‘Adnān rather
than Qaḥṭān or Rabī‘ah rather than Muḍar because the term ‘Arab takes in
all of these tribes.
Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr said that he believed that saying that it was revealed in the
dialect of Quraysh meant that most of it was revealed in the dialect of
Quraysh because other dialects than that of Quraysh exist in sound readings
with the use of the hamzahs and the like. Quraysh did not use the hamzah.
Ibn ‘Aṭiyyah said that the meaning of the ‘seven modes’ is that the
expressions of all seven tribes are in it. It means that sometimes it is in the
idiom of Quraysh, sometimes in the idiom of Hudhayl and sometimes in

 other idioms according to what is most eloquent and concise in expression.
Do you not see that with Arabs other than Quraysh ‘faṭr’ means beginning
the creation of something and working on it? It comes in the Qur’an and
Ibn ‘Abbās was not directed to its meaning until two Bedouin came to him
with a dispute over a well. One of them said, ‘Anā faṭartuhā (I began it).’ Ibn
‘Abbās said, ‘Then I understood the meaning of the words of the Almighty:
“the Bringer into Being (Fāṭir) of the heavens and the earth.” (6:14)’ He also said, ‘I
did not know the meaning of His words, “Our Lord, judge (iftaḥ) between us and
our people with the truth.” (7:89), until I heard the daughter of Dhū Yazin say to
her husband, “Come and I will judge (ufātiḥka) you.”’ Similarly ‘Umar ibn
al-Khaṭṭāb said that he used to not understand the words of the Almighty,
‘Or that He will no seize them little by little.’ (17:47) There are many examples of
this.
Third view. The seven dialects are all from the tribes of Muḍar. Some
people said that. They used as evidence what ‘Uthmān said, ‘The Qur’an
was revealed in the language of Muḍar.’ They said, ‘It is possible that part of
it is that of Quraysh, part Kinānah, part Asad, part Hudhayl, part Taym,
part Ḍabbah, and part Qays.’ They said these tribes of Muḍar contain the
seven dialects in these ranks. Ibn Mas‘ūd used to like those who copied out
the Qur’ans to be from Muḍar. Others objected to the idea that it was all
from Muḍar and said that there are rare usages in Muḍar with which it is
not permitted to write the Qur’an.
What is related from some scholars is exemplified by Qāḍī Ibn aṭ-Ṭayyib
who said, ‘I have reflected on the aspects of the differences in recitation and
have found them to be seven. Some involve changes of vowelling while the
meaning and form remain, like “aṭharu” and “aṭhara” in 11:78; some do not
change their form but change their meaning through inflection, as in 36:19,
reading “bā‘id” or “bā‘ada”; some retain their form and change their
meaning with different letters, like “nunshizuhā” (2:259) and “nunshiruhā”;
some change the form while the meaning remains as in 101:5 where both
‘ihn and ṣūf mean wool; some change their form and meaning like “ṭalḥin
manḍūd” (56:29) and “ṭal‘in manḍūd”; some entail a change of order as in
“sakratu-l-mawt bi-l-ḥaqq” and “sakratu-l-ḥaqq bi-l-mawt” in 50:19; and some
consist of addition or reduction such as His words, “ninety-nine female ewes”
(38:23), and “As for the boy, he was an unbeliever and his parents were
believers” (18:80), “then after they have been forced, Allah is Ever-Forgiving, Most

 Merciful to them” (24:33).
Fifth view. What is meant by the seven modes are meanings in the Book of
Allah: command and prohibition, promise and threat, stories, arguments
and parables. Ibn ‘Aṭiyyah says that this is weak because that is not called
aḥruf. Furthermore there is consensus that license is not granted in making
the lawful lawful or changing any of the meanings. Qāḍī Ibn aṭ-Ṭayyib
mentioned a hadith along these lines from the Prophet g and then said,
‘This is not part of what it is allowed for them to recite. Ḥarf in this means
‘manner’ as Allah says, “one who worships Allah on an edge.” (22:11).’ That is the
meaning of this hadith about the seven means of allowing and forbidding
and the like.
It is also said that what is meant by the seven aḥruf are the seven readings
that we have because all of that is soundly transmitted from the Prophet g.
This, however, is not correct, as we will now explain.

 Section on the seven readings
Most scholars, like ad-Dāwūdī, Ibn Abī Ṣufrah and others said that these
seven readings, which are ascribed to the seven readers, are not the seven
aḥruf for which the Companions had an allowance to recite. They refer
merely to one ḥarf of those seven, which is what ‘Uthmān collected in the
copy of the Qur’an which he authorised. Ibn an-Naḥḥās and others
mentioned that. These seven famous readings (qirā’āt) are the selections of
those Imams of recitation. That is because each of them chose what he
related and the aspect he knew of the recitations that he considered to be
the best and most appropriate. Each held to a path, related and recited it,
and became famous for it. He is known for it and it is ascribed to him, like
the mode of Nāfi‘ and the mode of Ibn Kathīr. None of them forbade
choosing another nor objected to it. They allowed it. Each of those seven
has two or more choices related from him. All are sound.
Muslims in this time have agreed to rely on what is soundly transmitted
from these imams: that which they related of the readings and wrote in
books. The consensus remains that they are correct and the preservation of
the Book which Allah promised has been secured. This is the position of the
earlier imams and excellent reliable men like Qāḍī Abū Bakr ibn aṭ-Ṭayyib,
aṭ-Ṭabarī and others. Ibn ‘Aṭiyyah said, ‘These seven readings have lasted
through different times and places and the prayer is performed using them,
as their soundness is established by consensus. As for the rare (shādhdh)
readings, the prayer is not performed using them because there is no
consensus on doing that. As for what is related from the Companions and
the Tābi‘ūn about that, it can only be believed that they transmitted that. As
for what is related from Abu-s-Sammāl and those connected to him, one
does not rely on it.’
Someone else said, ‘As for the rare (shādhdh) readings of the copies of the
transmitted Qur’an, they are not considered to be the Qur’an, and are not
acted on as if they were part of it. It is most probable that they are
clarification of the interpretation of the position of the one to whom they are
ascribed, like the reading of Ibn Mas‘ūd. If the transmitter is explicit about
having heard it from the Messenger of Allah g then scholars have two
positions about acting on it: negative or positive. The negative position is
based on the fact that the transmitter did not relate it as a hadith, but as

 Qur’an, and it is not affirmed as such and so is not confirmed. The positive
position is that even if it is not affirmed as Qur’an, it is affirmed as sunnah,
and that obliges action, just as the case with all single hadiths.’

 Section: The hadith of ‘Umar and Hishām
Ibn ‘Aṭiyyah said, ‘Allah allowed these seven modes to His Prophet g and
Jibrīl brought them to him in a way which ensured inimitability and precise
cohesion. His words, “Recite what is easy of it,” did not permit any of the
Companions to change any expression in one of these dialects as he wished.
If that had been the case, then the Qur’an would not have been inimitable,
as people would have changed this and that and then it would have become
other than what was revealed from Allah. The permission was for the seven
modes of the Prophet g in order to give ample scope to his Community.
Once he recited to Ubayy what Jibrīl brought him, and once to Ibn Mas‘ūd
what had been presented to him.
‘This was the crux of the difference between ‘Umar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb’s
reading of Sūrat al-Furqān and that of Hishām ibn Ḥakīm. Otherwise how
was it proper for the Prophet g to say about the recitation of each of them,
which differed, “That was how Jibrīl recited it to me.” Was it only that he
recited it once like that and once like this? This is the meaning of what Anas
said when he recited ‘aṣwab’ instead of ‘aqwam’ in Sūrat al-Muzzammil
(73:5) meaning ‘more conducive’. He was told, “We recite it ‘aqwam’.” He
replied, “‘Aṣwab’, ‘aqwam’ and ‘ahya’a’ are all the same.” This is the sense of
what is reported from the Prophet g. If anyone had been permitted to do
that, that would have invalidated the words of Allah, “It is We who have sent
down the Reminder and We will preserve it.” (15:9).’
Al-Bukhārī, Muslim and others related that ‘Umar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb said, ‘I
heard Hishām ibn Ḥakīm reciting Sūrat al-Furqān in a different way from
how I read it and how the Messenger of Allah g himself had recited it to
me. I almost grabbed him but I waited until he had finished. Then I got him
by his cloak and took him to the Messenger of Allah g. I said, “Messenger
of Allah, I heard this one reciting Sūrat al-Furqān differently to how you
recited it to me!” The Messenger of Allah g said, “Let him recite.” He
recited it as I had heard him recite it. The Messenger of Allah g said,
“That is how it was revealed.” Then he told me, “Recite.” I recited it and he
said, “That is how it was revealed. This Qur’an was revealed in seven
modes, so recite whatever you find easy of it.”’
Similar to this hadith is the one Muslim transmitted from Ubayy ibn Ka‘b.
He said, ‘I was in the mosque when a man came in to pray. He recited a

 reading to which I objected. Then another man entered and recited a
different recitation to that of his companion. When they finished the prayer,
we all went to the Messenger of Allah g and I said, “This one recited a
reading to which I objected and the other entered and used a different
recitation to that of his companion.” The Prophet g commanded them to
recite, and the Prophet commended what they done. Then doubt entered
my heart such as had not even affected me in the Jāhiliyyah. When the
Prophet g saw what had overpowered me, he struck my chest and I started
to sweat, feeling alarm as if I had been looking at Allah. He said to me,
“Ubayy, I was sent a message to recite the Qur’an in one mode and I
replied that I wanted it to be made easy for my community. A second
message commanded me to recite it in two modes, and I replied that I
wanted it to be made easy for my community. Then I was told the third
time, ‘Recite it in seven modes. You can ask for something for each time you
returned to ask.’ I said, ‘O Allah, forgive my Community! O Allah, forgive
my Community!’ I delayed the third until a Day when all creation, even
Ibrahim e will ask of me.”’
Ubayy meant that he felt confusion and astonishment, in other words he
had an impulse from Shayṭān which sullied his state and muddied his mind
at that moment. The difference of the readings seemed terrible to him while
it was not in itself terrible. Otherwise what would entail denial of the
difference in the recitations, when that is not necessary? Praise be to Allah
who abrogated what is greater than a reading! When the Prophet g saw the
thought that occurred to him, he woke him up by striking his chest. The
result of that was the expansion of his breast and inward illumination so that
the unveiling and expansion took him to a state of vision. When the ugliness
of that thought was clear to him, he feared Allah and sweated profusely out
of shame before Allah. This thought is the type of thing about which the
Prophet g spoke when they said to him, ‘We find things in ourselves which
one of us finds too terrible to speak about.’ He asked, ‘Do you experience
that?’ ‘Yes,’ they replied. He said, ‘That is clear faith.’ Muslim transmitted it
from Abū Hurayrah. It will further be discussed in Sūrat al-A‘rāf, Allah
willing.

 The collection of the Qur’an and the reason ‘Uthmān had copies
of the Qur’an copied out and burned the rest. The memorisation
of the Qur’an by the Companions in the time of the Prophet g
In the time of the Prophet g, the Qur’an was scattered in the breasts of
men. People wrote some of it in on pages, on skins and on white stones and
flat stones, scraps and other things. Then a great number of reciters were
killed in the Battle of Yamāmah in the time of Abū Bakr. Something like
seven hundred of them were killed in a single day and ‘Umar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb
suggested to Abū Bakr that he should collect the Qur’an out of fear that the
shaykhs of the reciters such as Ubayy, Ibn Mas‘ūd and Zayd would all die.
They deputised Zayd ibn Thābit to do that, and so after great effort, he
collected it together without putting the sūrahs in order.
Al-Bukhārī reports that Zayd ibn Thābit said, ‘After the slaughter in the
war of Yamāmah, Abū Bakr sent for me, and ‘Umar was with him. Abū
Bakr said, “‘Umar has come to me and said, ‘Many people were killed in
the Battle of Yamāmah, and I fear that many Qur’an reciters will be killed
in other places and so much of the Qur’an will be lost unless you collect it
together. I think that you should collect the Qur’an together.’” Abū Bakr
said, “I said to ‘Umar, ‘How can I do something which the Messenger of
Allah g did not do?’ ‘Umar said, ‘By Allah, it is better.’ ‘Umar kept on at
me about it until Allah opened my breast to it and I thought what ‘Umar
thought.”’ Zayd ibn Thābit continued, ‘‘Umar was sitting with him, not
speaking. Abū Bakr said, “You are an intelligent young man and we have no
doubts about you. You used to write down the revelation for the Messenger
of Allah g. Therefore, you are to search out the Qur’an and collect it.” By
Allah, if he had obliged me to move a mountain, that would not have been
weightier for me than his command to me to collect together the Qur’an. I
replied, “How can the two of you do something which the Messenger of
Allah g did not do?” Abū Bakr said, “By Allah, it is better.” He continued
to keep on at me until Allah opened my breast to that to which Allah had
opened the breasts of Abū Bakr and ‘Umar. So I began to search out the
Qur’an and collect it from the parchments, shoulder-blades, palm fronds
and the breasts of men until I found two āyahs of Sūrat at-Tawbah with
Khuzaymah al-Anṣārī that I did not find with anyone else: “A Messenger has
come to you from among yourselves…” (9:128) The copy of the Qur’an in which

 the Qur’an was collected remained in the possession of Abū Bakr until Allah
took him, and then it was with ‘Umar until Allah took him, and then it was
with Ḥafṣah bint ‘Umar.’
Al-Layth related from ‘Abd ar-Raḥmān ibn Ghālib that Ibn Shihāb said
that it was with Abū Khuzaymah al-Anṣārī. Abū Thābit related that
Ibrāhīm said that what was with Khuzaymah or Abū Khuzaymah was: ‘But
if they turn away, say, “Allah is enough for me. There is no god but Him. I have put my
trust in Him. He is the Lord of the Mighty Throne.”’ (9:129) At-Tirmidhī said in
his hadith: ‘I found the end of at-Tawbah with Khuzaymah ibn Thābit: “A
Messenger has come to you from among yourselves. Your suffering is distressing to him; he
is deeply concerned for you; he is gentle and merciful to the believers But if they turn away,
say, ‘Allah is enough for me. There is no god but Him. I have put my trust in Him. He is
the Lord of the Mighty Throne.’ ” (9:128)’ He said that it is a sound ḥasan hadith.
Al-Bukhārī related that Zayd ibn Thābit said, ‘I missed one āyah of Sūrat
al-Aḥzāb when we copied out the Qur’an which I used to hear the
Messenger of Allah g recite. I only found it with Khuzaymah al-Anṣārī. It
is that about which Zayd made the testimony of the Messenger of Allah g
equal to that of two men: “Men who have been true to the contract they made with
Allah.” (33:23) At-Tirmidhī has: ‘I missed one āyah of Sūrat al-Aḥzāb when
we copied out the Qur’an which I used to hear the Messenger of Allah g
recite: “Among the believers are men who have been true to the contract they made with
Allah.” I looked for it and found it with Khuzaymah ibn Thābit or Abū
Khuzaymah and put it in its sūrah.”
According to what al-Bukhārī and at-Tirmidhī said, the first āyah at the
end of at-Tawbah was omitted from the first collection and the āyah from
Sūrat al-Aḥzāb was omitted from the second. Aṭ-Ṭabarī said that the āyah
from at-Tawbah was missing from the second collection. The first is
sounder, and Allah knows best.
If it is asked what was the point of ‘Uthmān unifying people under a single
copy of the Qur’ān when Abū Bakr had already achieved that, then the
response is that the aim of ‘Uthmān was not to gather people in order to
compile the Qur’an. Do you not see that he sent to Ḥafṣah to ask her to give
him the copy of the Qur’an so that it could be copied out and then returned
to her? ‘Uthmān did that because people were disagreeing about the various
recitations owing to the fact that the Companions had spread to different
areas and had begun to strongly disagree, such as the conflict which took

 place between the people of Iraq and the people of Syria according to
Ḥudhayfah.
They joined an expedition to Armenia and each group recited what had
been transmitted to them. They disagreed and quarrelled and some of them
called the others unbelievers, renouncing them completely, cursing one
another. Ḥudhayfah was alarmed at what he saw. As soon as he arrived
back in Madīnah, according to al-Bukhārī and at-Tirmidhī, before
returning to his house he went to ‘Uthmān and said, ‘This Community has
reached the stage where it will be destroyed!’ ‘Why?’ asked ‘Uthmān. He
said, ‘It is about the Book of Allah. I was on this expedition and some of the
people of Iraq, Syria and the Hijaz came together.’ Then he described what
had happened and said, ‘I fear that they will differ about their Book as the
Jews and Christians differed.’
This is evidence of the falseness of those who say that the seven aḥruf are
the seven present readings because there is no disagreement about them.
Suwayd ibn Ghafalah reported from ‘Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib that ‘Uthmān said,
‘What do you think about the copies of the Qur’an? The people have
disagreed about the reciters until a man says, “My reading is better than
your reading. My reading is more excellent than your reading.” This is
equivalent to disbelief.’ He replied, ‘What is your view, Amīr al-Mu’minīn?’
He said, ‘I think that we people should agree on one reading. If you differ
today, those after you will disagree more strongly.’ ‘Alī said, ‘The correct
opinion is yours, Amīr al-Mu’minīn.’ So ‘Uthmān sent a message to Ḥafṣah
saying, ‘Send us the pages in your possession and we will copy them and
then return them to you.’ She sent them to him and he ordered Zayd ibn
Thābit, ‘Abdullāh ibn az-Zubayr, Sa‘īd ibn al-‘Āṣ, and ‘Abd ar-Raḥmān ibn
al-Ḥārith ibn Hishām to make copies of them. ‘Uthmān told the group of
Qurayshīs, ‘When you and Zayd ibn Thābit disagree about any of the
Qur’an, write it in the dialect of Quraysh. It was revealed in their language.’
They did that. When they had copied it out, ‘Uthmān returned the pages to
Ḥafṣah and he sent a copy of what they had copied out to every region and
commanded that every sheet or copy with any other form of the Qur’an in
it should be burned. ‘Uthmān did this after gathering the Muhājirūn and
Anṣār and a group of Muslims and consulting them about it. They agreed
to collect what was sound and firm of the well-known readings from the
Prophet g and discard anything else. They thought that what he decided

 was right and correct. May Allah have mercy on him and all of them. Aṭ-
Ṭabarī related that ‘Uthmān brought together only Zayd and Abān ibn
Sa‘īd ibn al-‘Āṣ. This is weak. What al-Bukhārī, at-Tirmidhī and others
mentioned is sounder. Aṭ-Ṭabarī also said that the pages that Ḥafṣah had
were the model for the final collection. This is sound.
Ibn Shihāb said that he was told by ‘Ubaydullāh ibn ‘Abdullāh that
‘Abdullāh ibn Mas‘ūd disliked Zayd ibn Thābit copying out the Qur’an and
said, ‘Company of Muslims, withdraw from making copies and entrusting it
to one man. By Allah, I became Muslim while he was still in the loins of an
unbelieving father!’ meaning Zayd ibn Thābit. That is why ‘Abdullāh ibn
Mas‘ūd said, ‘People of Iraq, conceal the copies of the Qur’an you have and
keep them concealed. Allah says, “Those who misappropriate will arrive on the Day
of Rising with what they have misappropriated.” (3:161). Meet Allah with the
copies of the Qur’an.’ At-Tirmidhī transmitted it and it will be discussed in
Āl ‘Imrān, Allah willing.
Abū Bakr al-Anbārī said, ‘The fact that Abū Bakr, ‘Umar and ‘Uthmān
chose Zayd in the matter of collecting the Qur’an does not mean that they
were putting him over ‘Abdullāh ibn Mas‘ūd. ‘Abdullāh was better than
Zayd, older in Islam, had attended more battles and possessed more virtues.
Zayd, however, knew more of the Qur’an than ‘Abdullāh since he had
memorised it all during the lifetime of the Messenger of Allah g, whereas
‘Abdullāh had only memorised about seventy sūrahs while the Messenger of
Allah g was alive and learned the rest after his death. The one who knew
the entire Qur’an and memorised it while the Messenger of Allah g was
alive was more entitled to compile the Qur’an and to be preferred and
chosen to do so. No ignorant person should suppose that this is an attack on
‘Abdullāh ibn Mas‘ūd since the fact that Zayd had the better memory of the
Qur’an of the two does not mean that he should be preferred to him in
general terms, because Zayd also knew more Qur’an than Abū Bakr and
‘Umar, and he was certainly not better than them or equal to them in
virtue.’
Abū Bakr al-Anbārī said, ‘The objection which ‘Abdullāh ibn Mas‘ūd
made was done in anger and is not acted upon or accepted. There is no
doubt that once he was no longer angry he was satisfied with the excellence
of the decision of ‘Uthmān and the Companions of the Messenger of Allah
g and concurred with their agreement and abandoned his opposition to

 them.’
It is commonly known among the people who study transmission that
‘Abdullāh ibn Mas‘ūd learned the rest of the Qur’an after the death of the
Messenger of Allah g. One scholar said that ‘Abdullāh ibn Mas’ūd died
before learning all the Qur’an. Yazīd ibn Hārūn said, ‘The two sūrahs of
refuge have the same status as al-Baqarah and Āl ‘Imrān. Anyone who
claims that they are not part of the Qur’an has rejected Allah Almighty.’ He
was asked, ‘What about what ‘Abdullāh ibn Mas‘ūd says about them?’ He
replied, ‘There is no disagreement among the Muslims that ‘Abdullāh ibn
Mas‘ūd died before memorising all of the Qur’an.’ This requires some
investigation, as will come later.
Ismā‘īl ibn Isḥāq and others related that Ḥammād said – I think quoting
Anas ibn Mālik – ‘They disagreed about an āyah and would say, “The
Messenger of Allah g recited it to so-and-so.” He might be three days from
Madīnah and he would be sent for and would be asked, “How did the
Messenger of Allah g recite such-and-such an āyah to you?” and they would
write it as he said.’
Ibn Shihāb said, ‘One day they disagreed about tābūt. Zayd said tābūh. Ibn
az-Zubayr and Sa‘īd ibn al-‘Āṣ said tābūt. The disagreement was taken to
‘Uthmān who said, “Write it with tā’. It was revealed in the language of
Quraysh.”’ Al-Bukhārī and at-Tirmidhī transmitted it. Ibn ‘Aṭiyyah said,
‘Zayd recited it with hā’ and the Qurayshīs recited it with tā’. They
confirmed it with tā’ and the copies of the Qur’an have been written it as it
was in the past. ‘Uthmān had several copies of the Qur’an made. Some say
there were seven while the majority say that there were four. They were sent
to various areas. Matrix copies were sent to Iraq, Syria and Egypt, and the
reciters of the cities relied on them and none of them differed from the
original copy in the manner in which it was conveyed to them. No real
difference in the wording is found among the seven reciters, neither more
nor less. That is because they all relied on what was conveyed in ‘Uthmān’s
copy since ‘Uthmān wrote those places in some copies, but not others,
which was a notification that it was sound and it was permitted to recite
with all of them.
Ibn ‘Aṭiyyah said, ‘Then ‘Uthmān commanded other copies to be burned
or torn up (depending on whether that is read with a ḥā’ as tuḥraqu (burned)
or a khā’ as tukhraqu (torn)). Then that was buried.’ ‘Burned’ is a better

 transmission.
Abū Bakr al-Anbārī quoted Suwayd ibn Ghafalah in Kitāb ar-Radd, ‘I heard
‘Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib say, “Company of people! Fear Allah and beware of going
to excess about ‘Uthmān and calling him ‘The burner of Qur’ans’. By
Allah, he only burned them on the basis of the advice of a council of us, the
Companions of Muḥammad g.”’ It is also reported from ‘Umayr ibn Sa‘īd
that ‘Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib said, ‘If I had been ruler at the time of ‘Uthmān, I
would have done to the copies of the Qur’an the same thing that ‘Uthmān
did.’
Abu-l-Ḥasan ibn Baṭṭāl said, ‘The fact that ‘Uthmān ordered the
parchments and copies of the Qur’an to be burned when the Qur’an was
collected contains permission to burn writing which contains the Names of
Allah Almighty and shows that doing so is to honour it and protect it from
being trodden on and thrown without care to the ground.’ Ma‘mar related
from Ibn Ṭāwūs that his father used to burn pages when letters were
collected with him that contained ‘In the Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, Most
Merciful.’ ‘Urwah ibn az-Zubayr burned the books of fiqh he had at the time
of the Battle of Ḥarrah. Ibrāhīm disliked burning pages when the name of
Allah was on them. The position that they are burned is more likely to be
correct. ‘Uthmān did it. Qāḍī Abū Bakr said that it is permitted for the
leader to burn papers which contain the Qur’an if he thinks that should be
done.

 Section
Our scholars say that what ‘Uthmān did refutes the Ḥulūlīs
(incarnationists) and Hashwites (anthropomorphists) who say that the letters
and sounds are eternal and that recitation and reading are eternal and that
faith is eternal and the rūḥ is eternal. The Community and all groups of the
Christians, Jews and Brahmans believe – and indeed, so does every theist
and unitarian – that that which is eternal is unaffected by any event and no
one’s power can affect it by any aspect or means. Non-existence is not
possible for the eternal and the eternal does not become temporal and the
temporal does not become eternal. As for the eternal, there is no beginning
to its existence whereas the temporal is that which exists after it was not.
One group break the consensus of intelligent people of religions and others
and say that it is permitted for the temporal to become eternal and that
when the human servant of Allah recites the Words of Allah, the action of
speaking the words of Allah is eternal. They say that it is the same when he
carves letters from bricks and wood, or fashions letters from gold and silver,
or weaves cloth on which he embroiders an āyah from the Book of Allah.
Their action in doing that with the Words of Allah is eternal and so His
words are woven and eternal, carved and eternal, and fashioned and
eternal. They are told, ‘In the case of what you say about the Words of Allah
Almighty, can they be melted, effaced or burned?’ If they answer
affirmatively, then they have parted from the dīn. If they answer in the
negative, they are told, ‘So then what do say about the letters forming an
āyah of the Book of Allah from wax, gold, silver, wood or paper which falls
into a fire and melts or is burned? Do you say that the Words of Allah can
be burned?’ If they say, ‘Yes,’ then they have abandoned their position. If
they say, ‘No,’ it is said to them, ‘Did you not say that this writing is the
Word of Allah? But it has been burned! Or these letters are His Word? But
they have been melted!’ If they then answer that it is the letters that have
been burned while His Words remain, then they have returned to the truth
and what is correct.
They are close to the answer that the Prophet g gave when calling
attention to what the people of the truth say: ‘If the Qur’an were in a skin
and then fell into the fire, it would not burn.’ Allah Almighty says, ‘I sent
down a Book to you which cannot be washed away by water and you recite

 it asleep and wake.’ Muslim transmitted it. So it is confirmed that His
Words are not letters and do not resemble letters. This is a topic which has
been discussed at length and fully in the books of fundamental principles.
We explained it in Kitāb al-Asnā fī sharḥ asmā’i-llāhi-l-ḥusnā.

 Section
The Rafidites attack the Qur’an and say, ‘One person is sufficient to
confirm the transmission of an āyah and mode just as you have done. You
confirmed the statement of a single man, Khuzaymah ibn Thābit, in
reporting about the end of Sūrat at-Tawbah and the āyah in Sūrat al-Aḥzāb
“Among the believers are men…” (33:23).’ The reply to them is that when
Khuzaymah mentioned these words, many of the Companions remembered
them and Zayd himself recognised them. That is why he said, ‘I missed the
last two āyahs of Sūrat at-Tawbah.’ If he had not already known them, he
would not have known that something was missing. So the āyah was in fact
established by consensus, not by Khuzaymah alone. A second answer is that
it was established by the testimony of Khuzaymah alone and the evidence of
its soundness is found in the description of the Prophet g and so has no
need for another witness, which is not the case of the āyah in al-Aḥzāb. That
is established by the testimony of Zayd and Abū Khuzaymah who both
heard it from the Prophet g. Al-Muhallab said something similar and
mentioned that Khuzaymah is not Abū Khuzaymah with whom the āyah of
at-Tawbah was found and he was known among the Anṣār. Anas knew him
and said, ‘We inherited from him.’ The one with whom the āyah of al-Aḥzāb
was found was Khuzaymah ibn Thābit. There is no contradiction and it is
not the same story. So there is no confusion about it.
Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr said, ‘Nothing is known about the name of Abū
Khuzaymah. He is known by his kunyah, so he is Abū Khuzaymah ibn Aws
ibn Zayd ibn Aṣram ibn Tha‘labah ibn Ghunm ibn Mālik ibn an-Najjār. He
was present at the Battle of Badr and the subsequent battles. He died while
‘Uthmān ibn ‘Affān was caliph. He was the brother of Mas‘ūd ibn Aws.’ Ibn
Shihāb said that ‘Ubayd ibn as-Sabbāq said that Zayd ibn Thābit said, ‘I
found the end of at-Tawbah with Abū Khuzaymah al-Anṣārī.’ That is the
case. There is no relationship between him and Abū Khuzaymah al-Ḥārith
ibn Khuzaymah other than the fact they are both from the Anṣār. One was
from Aws and the other from Khazraj.
In Muslim and al-Bukhārī, Anas ibn Mālik is reported as saying, ‘The
Qur’an was gathered together in the time of the Prophet g by four, all of
whom were from the Anṣār: Ubayy, Mu‘ādh ibn Jabal, Zayd ibn Thābit,
and Abū Zayd.’ Anas was asked, ‘Who is Abū Zayd?’ and he replied, ‘One

 of my paternal uncles.’ We also find in al-Bukhārī that Anas said, ‘When the
Prophet g died only four knew all the Qur’an: Abu-d-Dardā’, Mu‘ādh ibn
Jabal, Zayd and Abū Zayd.’ He said, ‘We inherited from him.’ In another
transmission, he said, ‘Abū Zayd died without leaving descendants. He had
been present at Badr. The name of Abū Zayd was Sa‘d ibn ‘Ubayd.’
Ibn aṭ-Ṭayyib said, ‘These traditions do not indicate that the Qur’an was
not memorised in the time of the Prophet g and that only four of the Anṣār
knew it by heart as Anas stated. It is confirmed by multiple paths of
transmission that the entire Qur’an was also known by ‘Uthmān, ‘Alī,
Tamīm ad-Dārī, ‘Ubādah ibn aṣ-Ṣāmit, and ‘Abdullāh ibn ‘Amr ibn al-‘Āṣ.
Anas’ words mean that only these four took it directly from the mouth of the
Messenger of Allah g. Most of them learned some of it from him and some
of it from others. The transmissions corroborate each other about the four
imams knowing all the Qur’an during the lifetime of the Prophet g due to
the fact that they became Muslim early on and the Messenger g held them
in great esteem.’
The Qāḍī did not mention ‘Abdullāh ibn Mas‘ūd and Sālim, the client of
Abū Ḥudhayfah, although they were among those who knew the entire
Qur’an. Jarīr related from ‘Abdullāh ibn Yazīd aṣ-Ṣuhbānī from Kumayl
that ‘Umar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb said, ‘I was with the Messenger of Allah g and
with him were Abū Bakr and whomever Allah wished. We passed ‘Abdullāh
ibn Mas‘ūd who was praying. The Messenger of Allah g asked, “Who is
reciting the Qur’an?” He was told, “‘Abdullāh ibn Umm ‘Abd” He said,
“‘Abdullāh recites the Qur’an fresh as it was revealed.”’
One scholar said that this meant that he recited the first ḥarf in which the
Qur’an was revealed rather than the other seven, which the Messenger of
Allah g was allowed after the Messenger of Allah, Jibrīl, recited the Qur’an
to him in Ramadan. It is related that Abū Ẓubyān said, ‘‘Abdullāh ibn
‘Abbās asked me, “Which of the recitations do you recite?” I replied, “The
first recitation, that of Ibn Umm ‘Abd.” He told me, “Rather it was the last.
The Messenger of Allah g used to present the Qur’an to Jibrīl once a year.
In the year that he died, the Messenger of Allah g recited it to him twice.
‘Abdullāh was present and knew what was abrogated and changed in that
recitation.”’ In Muslim, ‘Abdullāh ibn ‘Amr stated that he heard the
Messenger of Allah g say, ‘Take the Qur’an from four: Ibn Umm ‘Abd –
and he began with him – Mu‘ādh ibn Jabal, Ubayy ibn Ka‘b and Sālim, the

 client of Abū Ḥudhayfah.’
These reports indicate that ‘Abdullāh knew all the Qur’an in the lifetime of
the Messenger of Allah g, contrary to what was said, and Allah knows best.
In Kitāb ar-Radd, Abū Bakr al-Anbārī transmitted that ‘Abdullāh ibn Mas‘ūd
said, ‘I learned 72 (or 73) sūrahs from the Messenger of Allah g and I read
to him from al-Baqarah as far as “Allah loves those who repent” (2:222).’ Abū
Isḥāq says that he learned the rest of the Qur’an from Mujammi‘ ibn
Jāriyah al-Anṣārī. If this is true, the consensus which Yazīd ibn Hārūn
mentioned is true and that is why Qāḍī Ibn aṭ-Ṭayyib did not mention him
among those who knew the Qur’an by heart in the time of the Messenger of
Allah g. Allah knows best.
Abū Bakr al-Anbārī related from Ibrāhīm ibn Mūsā al-Khūdrī from Yūsuf
ibn Mūsā from Mālik ibn Ismā‘īl from Zuhayr that Abū Isḥāq said, ‘I asked
al-Aswad what ‘Abdullāh used to do with respect to Sūrat al-A‘rāf. He said,
“He did not know it until he came to Kufa.”’ He said that one of the people
of knowledge said, ‘‘Abdullāh ibn Mas‘ūd died before he learned the two
sūrahs of Refuge. That is why they were not found in his copy of the Qur’an.’
Other things are said which will be dealt with at the end of the book, Allah
willing.
Abū Bakr said that Ibrāhīm ibn Mūsā related from Yūsuf ibn Mūsā from
‘Umar ibn Hārūn al-Khurāsānī from Rabī‘ah ibn ‘Uthmān that
Muḥammad ibn Ka‘b al-Quraẓī said, ‘Among those who knew the Qur’an
by heart when the Messenger of Allah g was alive were ‘Uthmān ibn
‘Affān, ‘Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib and ‘Abdullāh ibn Mas‘ūd.’ The people of
knowledge do not consider the hadith to be sound. It stops at Muḥammad
ibn Ka‘b and so it is severed. It is not taken nor relied on.
The words of the Prophet g, ‘Take the Qur’an from four: Ibn Umm
‘Abd…’ indicate its soundness. Part of what will make that clear is that the
people with the readings among the people of the Hijaz, Syria and Iraq all
traced their readings which they chose back to one of the Companions who
read it to the Messenger of Allah g and did not exclude anything from the
entire Qur’an. ‘Āṣim traced his reading to ‘Alī and Ibn Mas‘ūd, Ibn Kathīr
to Ubayy as did Abū ‘Amr ibn al-‘Alā’, and ‘Abdullāh ibn ‘Āmir traced his to
‘Uthmān. All of them said that they had read it to the Messenger of Allah
g. The isnāds of these readings are continuous and the transmitters are
reliable, as al-Khaṭṭābī stated.

 What has come about the order of the sūrahs and āyahs of the
Qur’an, its vowelling and dots, its ḥizbs and tens, the number of
its letters, juz’s, words and āyahs
Ibn aṭ-Ṭayyib said, ‘Some say that the Salaf differed about the order of the
sūrahs of the Qur’an and some of them wrote the sūrahs in the order that
they were revealed and put the Makkan before the Madinan, and some put
al-Ḥamd (Fātiḥah) at the beginning, and others put al-‘Alaq at the
beginning. This was the case in the first copy of ‘Alī. As for the copy of Ibn
Mas‘ūd, it begins with “Master of the Day of the Dīn” (1:4) and then al-
Baqarah, and then an-Nisā’ with a different order. The copy of Ubayy
began with al-Ḥamd, then an-Nisā’, then Āl ‘Imrān, then al-An‘ām, then
al-A‘rāf, then al-Mā’idah. There were significant differences.’
The answer of Qāḍī Abū Bakr ibn aṭ-Ṭayyib is that it is possible that the
order of the sūrahs we have today in the Qur’an is by ijtihād on the part of the
Companions. Makkī mentioned this in the tafsīr of Surat at-Tawbah. He
mentioned the order of the āyahs in the sūrah and that placing the basmalah at
the beginnings of them was from the Prophet g. Since he did not
command that for Sūrat at-Tawbah, it was left without a basmalah. This is
the soundest of what is said about it.
In the Jāmi‘, Ibn Wahb stated that Sulaymān ibn Bilāl heard Rabī‘ah being
asked why al-Baqarah and Āl ‘Imrān were put first when there were about
eighty sūrahs revealed before them and they were revealed in Madīnah.
Rabī‘ah said, ‘They were put first and the Qur’an was arranged according
to the knowledge of those who arranged it and had knowledge of that. This
is what we ended up with and we do not ask about it.’ Sunayd mentioned
from Mu‘tamir from Sallām ibn Miskīn from Qatādah that Ibn Mas‘ūd
said, ‘Whoever of you seeks a model, should model himself on the
Companions of the Messenger of Allah g. They have the best hearts of this
community, the deepest knowledge, least artifice, straightest guidance and
the best state. Allah chose them to be the Companions of His Prophet g
and to establish His dīn. So acknowledge their excellence and follow in their
footsteps. They followed straight guidance.’
Some scholars say that the arrangement of the sūrahs of the Qur’an which
we find in our copies of the Qur’an was at the instruction of the Prophet g.
What is related about the differences between the copies of Ubayy, ‘Alī and

 ‘Abdullāh was before the final presentation. The Messenger of Allah g
arranged those sūrahs for them after they had done that. Yūnus related from
Ibn Wahb that he heard Mālik say, ‘The Qur’an was arranged according to
what they heard from the Messenger of Allah g.’
Abū Bakr al-Anbārī mentioned in Kitāb ar-Radd, ‘Allah Almighty revealed
the Qur’an all at once to the lowest heaven, and then it came down in parts
to the Prophet g over twenty years. A sūrah would be revealed about a
matter which happened and an āyah would answer an inquiry. Jibrīl would
give the Messenger of Allah g the place of the sūrah and the āyah. So the
sūrahs are in order as the āyahs and letters are in order. All of it is from
Muḥammad, the Seal of the Messengers g from the Lord of the Worlds.
Whoever changes the order of the sūrahs is like someone who nullifies the
order of the āyahs and changes the letters and the words. There is no
argument against the people who possess the truth in putting al-Baqarah
before al-An‘ām when al-An‘ām was revealed before al-Baqarah because
the order is taken from the Messenger of Allah g. He said, “Put this sūrah in
such-and-such a place in the Qur’an.” Jibrīl acquainted him with the
position of the āyahs.’
Ḥasan ibn al-Ḥubāb related from Abū Bakr ibn ‘Ayyāsh from Abū Isḥāq
that al-Barā’ said, ‘The last of the Qur’an to be revealed was, “They will ask
you for a fatwā. Say: ‘Allah gives you a fatwā about people who die without direct heirs.’”
(4:175).’ Abū Bakr ibn ‘Ayyāsh said, ‘Abū Isḥāq erred because it is reported
from Ibn ‘Abbās that the last part of the Qur’an to be revealed was, “Show
fear of a Day when you will be returned to Allah. Then every self will be paid in full for
what it earned. They will not be wronged” (2:281). Jibrīl told the Prophet g,
“Muḥammad, put it at the beginning of āyah 281 of al-Baqarah.”’
Abu-l-Ḥasan ibn Baṭṭāl said, ‘Whoever says this, does not say that the
recitation of the Qur’an in the prayer and lessons must be in the order that
it is in copies of the Qur’an. Rather it is only mandatory to put the sūrahs in
order when writing them down, and it is not known that any of them said
that the same order is mandatory in the prayer or in recitation of the
Qur’an and study, or that it is not lawful for someone to learn al-Kahf
before al-Baqarah or al-Ḥajj before al-Kahf. Do you not see that ‘Ā’ishah
told the person who asked about this, “There is nothing wrong in whichever
you recite first. The Prophet g used to recite one sūrah in a rak‘ah and then
would recite in the next rak‘ah a different sūrah than the one that follows it.”

 ‘As for what is reported from Ibn Mas‘ūd and Ibn ‘Umar about it being
disliked to recite the Qur’an out of order, claiming that it upsets the heart,
what they meant by that was reciting the sūrah out of order and beginning
from its end and then working backwards, because that is forbidden. Some
people do this with the Qur’an and poetry to subject the tongue to that and
facilitate memorisation. Allah forbade doing this in the Qur’an because it
disorders His sūrahs and is counter to what He meant by it.’
Part of what indicates that it is not mandatory to use the chronological
order of revelation in copies of the Qur’an is that it is confirmed that certain
āyahs were revealed in Madīnah and then placed in Makkan sūrahs. ‘Ā’ishah
said, “Sūrat al-Baqarah and Sūrat an-Nisā’ were revealed when I was with
him (i.e. in Madīnah) but they come in the copies of the Qur’an before
earlier sūrahs of the Qur’an revealed in Makkah.” If they had been arranged
by historical revelation, it would be obliged to break the order of the āyahs of
the sūrahs.
Abū Bakr al-Anbārī related from Qāḍī Ismā‘īl ibn Isḥāq from Ḥajjāj ibn
Minhāl from Hishām that Qatādah said, ‘The sūrahs of the Qur’an revealed
in Madīnah were: al-Baqarah, Āl ‘Imrān, an-Nisā’, al-Mā’idah, al-Anfāl, at-
Tawbah, ar-Ra‘d, an-Naḥl, al-Ḥajj, an-Nūr, al-Aḥzāb, Muḥammad, al-Fatḥ,
al-Ḥujurāt, ar-Raḥmān, al-Ḥadīd, al-Mujādalah, al-Mumtaḥanah, aṣ-Ṣaff,
al-Jumu‘ah, al-Munāfiqūn, at-Taghābun, aṭ-Ṭalāq, at-Taḥrīm, az-Zilzāl,
and an-Naṣr. Those sūrahs were revealed in Madīnah while the rest were
revealed in Makkah.’
Abū Bakr said, ‘If someone abandons traditions, turns away from
consensus and orders the sūrahs based on their positions in Madīnah and
Makkah, he does not know where to put the Fātiḥah, because of people’s
disagreement about where it was revealed, and needs to delay the āyah at the
beginning of 235 of al-Baqarah to the beginning of 240. If someone ruins
the order of the Qur’an, he has disbelieved in it and rejects what
Muḥammad g related from his Lord. It is said the reason for putting the
Madinan before the Makkan is that Allah Almighty addressed the Arabs in
their language, using the styles of speech and discourse that they knew.
When one of their linguistic styles was based on alteration of the order in
speech, they were addressed in that way in the Book of Allah Almighty. Had
they noticed it missing from the Qur’an, they would asked why this was
missing from it.’

 Section
As for the diacritical marks of the Qur’an and its dots, it is reported that
‘Abd al-Malik ibn Marwān commanded them to be added, and that was
undertaken by al-Ḥajjāj in Wasit. He worked on the task and added its ḥizbs.
He commanded the governor of Iraq, al-Ḥasan, and Yaḥyā ibn Ya‘mar to
do that. After that he wrote a book in Wasit on the readings, in which he
compiled what was related about the disagreement of people in relation to
the script. People used that book for a long time until Ibn Mujāhid wrote his
book on the readings. In Kitāb aṭ-Ṭabaqāt az-Zubaydī quotes al-Mubarrad as
saying that the first person to use dots in the Qur’an was Abu-l-Aswad ad-
Du’alī. Ibn Sīrīn also mentioned that he had a copy of the Qur’an in which
Yaḥyā ibn Ya‘mar had put the dots.

 Section
As for the position regarding the division of the Qur’an into groups of ten
āyah or a‘shār, Ibn ‘Aṭiyyah said, ‘In one of the histories I read that the
Abbasid al-Ma’mūn commanded that to be done. It is also said that al-
Ḥajjāj did it.’ In the Kitāb al-Bayān, ad-Dānī said that ‘Abdullāh ibn Mas‘ūd
disliked the marking of tens in the copies of the Qur’an and that he erased
them. Mujāhid is reported to have disliked the signs for tens in copies of the
Qur’an.
Ashhab said, ‘I heard Mālik being asked about the signs for tens which are
in the Qur’an in red and other colours and he disliked that, saying, “There
is nothing wrong in marking the tens with [normal] ink.” He was asked
about copies of the Qur’an in which the ends of sūrahs were written along
with the number of āyahs in every sūrah. He said, “I dislike anything
[additional] being written or vowelled in the master copies. As for those
copies by which children learn, I see no harm in doing that.”’ Ashhab said,
‘Then he produced for us a copy of the Qur’an which had belonged to his
grandfather. He had written it when ‘Uthmān had the Qur’an copied out.
We saw the ends were written in ink in something resembling a chain which
extended for an entire line and I saw that the āyahs had diacritical marks in
ink.’
Qatādah said, ‘They began with the dots, then with marking the division of
the fives and then the tens.’ Yaḥyā ibn Abī Kathīr said, ‘The Qur’an was
bare in the original copies and the first thing that they did was to put dots
on the bā’, tā’ and thā’. They said, “There is nothing wrong in it. It makes it
clearer.” Then they put dots at the ends of āyahs and then they put openings
and ends of sūrahs.’
Abū Ḥamzah said, ‘Ibrāhīm an-Nakha‘ī noticed in my copy of the Qur’an
the opening of such-and-such a sūrah. He said to me, “Erase it. ‘Abdullāh ibn
Mas‘ūd said, ‘Do not mix with the Book of Allah something which is not
part of it.’”’ Abū Bakr as-Sarrāj said, ‘I asked Abū Rāzin, “Do I write Sūrah
such-and-such in my copy of the Qur’an?” He replied, “I fear that people
will come who do not know it and think that those words are part of the
Qur’an.”’
Ad-Dānī said, ‘All these reports which allow the marking of tens and fives
and beginnings of sūrahs and the beginnings of āyahs say that it was done by

 the Companions whose ijtihād led them to that. I think that those of them
who objected to that objected to the use of colours like red, yellow and so
forth, although the Muslims in other areas agreed on their use in the master
copies and other copies, and prohibition and error were removed from them
in what they agreed upon, Allah willing.’

 Section
As for the number of its letters and juz’s, Sallām al-Ḥimānī said, ‘Al-Ḥajjāj
ibn Yūsuf gathered the reciters, ḥuffāẓ and scribes and said, “Tell me how
many letters there are in the entire Qur’an.” I was one of that group. We
calculated and agreed that the Qur’an had three hundred and forty
thousand, seven hundred and forty (340, 740) letters. Then he said, “Tell me
which letter ends half of the Qur’an.” It was in al-Kahf, on the fā’ of wa-l-
yatalaṭṭaf [18:19, “he should go about with caution.”]” He said, “Tell me the
thirds.” The first third was found to be at the beginning of 9:100 and at the
second at the beginning of 26:100 or 101. The last third was the rest of the
Qur’an. He said, “Tell me the sevenths of the letters.” The first seventh was
on the dāl in 4:55, the second on the tā’ in 9:77, the third on the alif in
11:35, the fourth on the alif in 22:34, the fifth on the hā’ in 33:36, the sixth
on the wāw in 48:6, and the seventh consists of the rest of the Qur’an.’
Abū Muḥammad Sallām stated, ‘We did that over four months. Every
night al-Ḥajjāj would read a fourth. The end of the first fourth was at the
end of al-An‘ām, the second in al-Kahf, the third at the end of az-Zumar
and the fourth consisted of the rest.’ This is contrary to what is mentioned
by ad-Dānī in Kitāb al-Bayān.

 Section
As for the number of the āyahs of the Qur’an in the first Madinan copy,
Muḥammad ibn ‘Īsā said, ‘The number of the āyahs of the Qur’an in the
first Madinan copy was six thousand.’ Abū ‘Amr said, ‘It is the number
related by the people of Kufa from the people of Madīnah, and they did not
name anyone specifically on whom they relied in that.’
As for the final Madinan copy, according to Ismā‘īl ibn Ja‘far, it has six
thousand two hundred and fourteen (6214) āyahs. Al-Faḍl said, ‘The number
of the āyahs of the Qur’an according to the Makkans was six thousand two
hundred and nineteen (6219). That is the number related by Sālim and al-
Kisā’ī from Ḥamzah. Al-Kisā’ī attributed it to ‘Alī.’ Muḥammad said, ‘The
number of the āyahs of the Qur’an according to the Basrans was six
thousand two hundred and four (6204), which is the number which their
Salaf passed down. As for the number of the people of Syria, Yaḥyā ibn al-
Ḥārith adh-Dhimārī said it was six thousand two hundred and twenty-six
(6226). One transmission has six thousand two hundred and twenty-five
(6225).’ Ibn Dhakwān said, ‘I think that Yaḥyā did not count the basmalah.’
Abū ‘Amr said, ‘These are the numbers that people have exchanged and
counted in all regions, in the past and recently.’
As for the number of its words, al-Faḍl ibn Shādhān said, ‘The total
number of the words of the Qur’an according to ‘Aṭā’ ibn Yasār is seventy-
seven thousand four hundred and thirty-nine (77,439) and its letters are
three hundred and twenty-three thousand, and fifteen (323,015).’ This
differs from what al-Ḥimānī said. Ibn Kathīr reported that Mujāhid said,
‘This is what we counted of the Qur’an: it has three hundred and twenty-
one thousand, one hundred and eighty (321,180) letters.’ This also differs
from what al-Ḥimānī mentioned.

 The meaning of the words sūrah, āyah, kalimah (word) and ḥarf
(letter)
The word ‘sūrah’, which means chapter, wall or fence in Arabic, is used in
the Qur’an to make each chapter clear and distinct from every other sūrah.
The chapters are called that because in them one ascends from one degree
to the next. It is said that they are called that because of their honour and
elevation, as is said of walls which are raised up in the land. It is said that
they are called that because the one who reads them looks forward at what
lies ahead, like the walls of a building. All these are without hamzah. It is said
that they are called that because they are cut out from the Qur’an on their
own, as the Arabs call a leftover su’r. In that case the word would have a
hamzah which was replaced with a wāw. It is said that they are called that
because of their completion and perfection as this word is used for a fine
camel.
An āyah is a sign. It is a sign since it is separate and distinct from the words
before it and the words after it; it is clear from other signs and is on its own.
The Arabs say, ‘There is an āyah between me and so-and-so,’ meaning a
sign. That is also its usage in: ‘The sign of his kingship.’ (2:248) It is said that it
is called that because it is a collection of letters of the Qur’an, as one says,
‘The people went forth with their full company (āyah).’ It is said that it is
called āyah because it is a wonder which people are unable to imitate.
Grammarians disagree about the root of āyah. Sībawayh said that it is
ayayah on the measure of fa‘alah and because the yā’ is vowelled and has a
fatḥah before it, it becomes alif and so it is āyah. Al-Kisā’ī said that its root is
ayayah and the yā’ accepts the alif with a fatḥah before it and is elided because
they are similar. Al-Farrā’ says that its root is ayyayah and it accepts the alif
out of dislike of the doubling and becomes āyah.
As for word (kalimah), it is a composite structure which is made up of a
mixture of letters. The longest words in the Book of Allah are eleven letters
long, like “la-yastakhlifannahum” (24:55) and “a-nulzimukumūhā” (11:28) and
the like. As for “fa-asqaynakumūhu” (15:22), it is ten in writing and eleven in
articulation. The shortest have two letters, like mā, la, laka, lahu, and the like.
Some words are just one letter, such as the interrogative hamzah and the
conjunctive wāw, but are not enunciated on their own.
Sometimes a complete āyah is comprised of a single word, as in wa-l-fajr,

 wa-ḍ-ḍuḥā, and wa-l-‘aṣr. That is also the case in alif-lām-mīm, alif-lām-mīm-
ṣād, ṭā-hā, yā-sīn, and ḥā-mīm according to the Kufans. That occurs at the
beginnings of sūrahs, but not inside them. Abū ‘Amr ad-Dānī said, ‘I do not
know of any word which on its own is an āyah except for mudhāmmatān in
Sūrat ar-Raḥmān (55:64).’ Two words may become connected and be two
āyahs, as in ḥā-mīm ‘ayn-sīn-qāf according to the Kufans.
It is possible that elsewhere a single word may stand for a complete and
self-sustaining āyah. Allah says: ‘The most excellent Word of your Lord was fulfilled
for the Tribe of Israel for their steadfastness.’ (7:136-137) It is said that ‘word’ here
refers to Allah’s words: ‘We desired to show kindness to those who were oppressed in
the land.’ (28:4-5) The Almighty says, ‘He bound them to godfearing self-restraint
(literally ‘word of taqwā’)’ (48:26). Mujāhid said that the ‘word’ is: ‘There is no
god but Allah.’ The Prophet g said, ‘Two words are light on the tongue,
heavy in the balance, beloved to the Al-Merciful: “Glory be to Allah and by
His praise. Glory be to Allah, the Immense.”’ The Arabs sometimes call an
entire ode and story a ‘word’ since it is their custom to call a thing by the
name of what it comes from or is close to it and it is metaphorical.
The word ḥarf (letter) is the shape which stands alone in a word of which it
is made up. A letter can be called a word and a word a letter as we made
clear. Abū ‘Amr ad-Dānī said, ‘Are the letters of the alphabet at the
beginnings of sūrahs, such as ṣād, qāf, and nūn letters or words? I say that they
are words, not letters. That is because a letter is not unvowelled nor is it
alone in a sūrah nor separate from what is mixed with it. But these are
unvowelled, alone, separate, like words which are distinct. That is why they
are called words rather than letters.’ Abū ‘Amr said that the term ‘ḥarf’ can
also be used with the meaning of a direction as in 22:11. Similarly the aḥruf
of the Qur’an are seven modes of language. Allah knows best.’

 Does the Qur’an contain words which are not Arabic?
There is no disagreement among the imams that the Qur’an contains
words composed in a non-Arabic mode and names of people which are not
Arabic, such as Isrā’īl, Jibrīl, ‘Imrān, Nūḥ and Lūṭ. They disagree about
whether there are words other than proper names that are non-Arabic.
Qāḍī Ibn aṭ-Ṭayyib, aṭ-Ṭabarī and others believe that there are no non-
Arabic words in it and the Qur’an is pure Arabic, and whatever words
found in it ascribed to other languages happen to be common to both, and
so the Arabs, Persians, Abyssinians and others used them. Some claim that
non-Arabic words exist in the Qur’an but that since they are so few that
does not preclude the Qur’an being pure Arabic and the Prophet g from
speaking the language of his people. Mishkāt (24:35) is a niche, nasha’a means
‘to rise in the night’ as in ‘nāshi’ata-l-layl’ (73:6), qaswarah (74:51) is a lion and
kiflayn (57:28) means ‘double’. These are found in Abyssinian. Ghassāq
(38:57) means ‘foul’ in Turkish. Qisṭās (17:35; 26:182) means ‘balance’ in
Greek. Sijjīl (21:104; 15:74; 105:4) means ‘stones’ in Persian. Ṭūr (2:63; 2:93,
etc.) is a mountain and yamm (7:136. etc.) means sea in Syriac. Tannūr
(11:40; 23:27) is the surface of the earth in Persian.
Ibn ‘Aṭiyyah said, ‘The truth about the expression of these words is that
their origin is foreign but the Arabs used them and Arabicised them and so
they are Arabic. When the Qur’an was revealed in their language, the Arabs
had mixed with other languages via trade and travel. There were the
journeys of Quraysh and the journey of Musāfir ibn Abī ‘Amr to Syria, the
journeys of ‘Umar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb, ‘Amr ibn al-‘Āṣ and ‘Ammārah ibn al-
Walīd to Abyssinia, and the journeys of al-A‘shā to Hira [in Iraq] and his
keeping the company of the Christians there: he is considered to be an
authority in language. Through all of that the Arabs acquired foreign words
and changed some of them by reducing the number of letters and lessening
their foreign quality. They used them in their poetry and conversations until
they became part of sound Arabic and are clear. It is according to this that
the Qur’an was revealed. If an Arab is ignorant of it, it is clear ignorance of
another language, just as Ibn ‘Abbās did not know the meaning of ‘fāṭir’ and
other things.’ Ibn ‘Aṭiyyah said, ‘What aṭ-Ṭabarī believed about the two
languages both using the same expressions is unlikely. Rather one of them is
the root and the other the branch in most cases.’

 Others say that the first is sounder. The statement that the root of the
words come from another language and have entered Arabic is not more
appropriate than the reverse. The Arabs either spoke them or did not. If the
first is true, then it is part of their language. It is not unlikely for others to
use the same words. The great imam Abū ‘Ubayd said that.
If it is said that the words do not have the morphological forms of Arabic
words and so they are not from Arabic, we say that if someone tells you that
their morphological forms are limited so that these words are not part of
them, the Qāḍī has investigated the bases of the morphological forms of
Arabic and returned these words to them by a grammatical approach. If the
Arabs did not speak them or know them, it would be impossible for Allah to
address them by something they did not know. In that case, the Arabic
would not be clear Arabic and the Messenger g would not be addressing
his people in their language. And Allah knows best.

 Points about the inimitability of the Qur’an, preconditions of the
miracle and its reality
A miracle (mu‘jizah) is the proof of the Prophets which indicates their
truthfulness. It is called that [the verb means ‘to be unable to do’] because
no human being is able to do the like of it. It has five preconditions. If one of
them is missing, it is not a miracle.
– It must be something which only Allah can do. This precondition is
necessary because if someone comes at a time in which it is possible for
there to be Messengers and claims to be a Messenger and makes his miracle
consist of moving and being still, standing and sitting, that is not a miracle
nor evidence of his truthfulness since another creature can do that. Miracles
consist of things like splitting the sea, splitting the moon and other such
things which a human being cannot do.
– It must break normal patterns. If someone comes at night and his sign is
that the night will come after the day or the sun rise in the east in the
morning, that is not a miracle because it is something which only Allah can
do and it was not done for his sake. It was like that before he made his claim
and like that when he made his claim. A claim of proof of Prophethood is
like any other claim. If the evidence exists, it provides proof of truthfulness.
Evidence is provided in the form of things which break normal patterns like
turning a staff into a snake, the rock splitting and the she-camel emerging,
or water springing from fingers like a spring, or similar matters which break
normal patterns and can only be done by the Creator of the heavens and
the earth. These signs are equivalent to a statement by the Lord informing
us that what the Messenger says is the truth.
An example of this would be if there were a group of people in the
presence of a king and one of the men, who was both seen and heard by the
king, said, ‘People! the King commands you to do this and that. The
evidence for that is that the King will affirm me by one of his actions:
removing his signet-ring from his hand with the intention of verifying what I
say.’ When the king hears his words and his claim and then does that action
which attests to his truthfulness, that is equivalent to him making a
statement about the truthfulness of his claim. That is the case when Allah
does something which only He can do and breaks normal patterns at the
hand of the Messenger: that is equivalent to His words attesting to the

 truthfulness of His Messenger.
– It must be claimed to testify to the Message. If the claimant says, ‘My
Sign is that Allah will turn this water into oil or move the earth when I tell it
to shake,’ then if Allah does this, it is achieved.
– It must occur in order to support this claim against those who challenge
him such as when he says, ‘I am a Prophet and my sign is that this she-
camel will speak or that my hand will speak.’ If it then speaks and says, ‘He
lied. He is not a Prophet,’ the words that Allah created indicate that the
claimant lied because what Allah did was not in keeping with his claim.
This is similar to what was related from Musaylimah the Liar who claimed
to be a Prophet when he spat into a well to make its water abundant and the
well collapsed and all its water departed. What Allah did was a sign which
negated his claim.
– It must be that no one successfully comes up with the like of what he is
challenged to do. If this precondition is met, the miracle indicates the
Prophethood of the one at whose hands it appears. If Allah were to bring
someone who did the like of what he did when challenged to do so, that
would negate his Prophethood and it would no longer be a miracle or prove
his truthfulness. That is why the Almighty says, ‘Let them produce a discourse like
if they are telling the truth’ (52:34) and ‘Or do they say, “He has invented it”? Say:
“Then produce ten invented sūrahs like this.”’ (11:13) It is as if He were saying, ‘If
you claim that Muḥammad g wrote the Qur’an and produced it, then
produce ten sūrahs like it. If you are all unable to do so, then know that it is
not something that he produced.’
It is not said that miracles with the five preconditions are limited to the
truthful, because the Dajjāl, as our Prophet g said, will have immense
matters appear at his hands. The difference is that one claims to be a
Messenger and the other to be a Lord, and there is a great difference
between the blind and the seeing. It is entirely logical for some of creation to
be sent to others. This is not impossible and so it is also not unlikely for
Allah to provide proofs of the truthfulness of someone who brings Divine
Law and religion.

 Section
If you affirm this, know that there are two types of miracle. The first is that
which is famous and whose time ended at the death of the Prophet g, and
the second are those transmitted by multiple traditions as being sound and
confirmed and hence must be known. The precondition is that many people
transmitted it and have knowledge of what they transmit and the whole
chain is reliable so that it is impossible that there be any falsehood in it. This
is the case with the Qur’an and the existence of the Prophet g since the
Community has transmitted the Qur’an from generation to generation
going back to the Prophet g whose existence is necessarily known and
whose truthfulness was confirmed by miraculous proofs. The Messenger g
took it via Jibrīl from his Lord. The Qur’an has been transmitted from two
Messengers who are protected from adding to it or subtracting from it, and
then it has been transmitted to us by such large numbers of people that it is
not possible that they lie in what they transmit and hear. That is why we
necessarily know that they speak the truth in what they transmit about the
existence of Muḥammad g and the Qur’an arriving through him and the
challenge issued by it. In respect of worldly knowledge, that is like a man’s
knowledge of what has been transmitted to him about the existence of
places like Basra, Syria, Iraq, Khorasan, Madīnah, Makkah and similar
widely known and transmitted reports. The Qur’an will remain a miracle
until the Day of Rising whereas the miracles of other Prophets ended with
their death. The Qur’an will not be changed or altered as happened with
the Torah and Gospel.
There are ten aspects to the inimitability of the Qur’an.
– Its wondrous composition differs from every usual order in Arabic and
other languages because its arrangement is not any kind of poetry, as Allah
says, ‘We did not teach him poetry nor would it be right for him.’ (36:68) In Ṣaḥīḥ
Muslim, it is reported that Unays, the brother of Abū Dharr, told Abū Dharr,
‘In Makkah I met a man who claims that Allah sent him.’ He asked, ‘What
do people say about him?’ He replied, ‘They say: he is a poet, a soothsayer
and a sorcerer.’ Unays was a poet and said, ‘I have heard the words of the
soothsayers and this is not like their words. I compared him with the reciters
of poetry and it was not like them. No one after me should err and say he
was a poet. He is truthful and they are liars.’ When ‘Utbah ibn Rabī‘ah,

 known for his esteemed position in judging rhetoric and eloquence, heard
the Qur’an, he affirmed that it was not sorcery or poetry and that he had
never heard anything like it.
– Its style differs from all the other styles of the Arabs.
– It has a lucid, eloquent style which could not possibly come from a
creature. Reflect on that in Sūrat Qāf (50), Sūrat az-Zumar (39) and
Ibrāhīm (14) and you will clearly see its eloquence which a creature could
not possibly originate. Ibn al-Ḥaṣṣār said, ‘Anyone who knows that Allah
Almighty is the Truth knows that this purity of style is not found in any
other discourse.’
Ibn al-Ḥaṣṣār went on, ‘These three – arrangement, purity of style and
lucid eloquence – are found in every sūrah, indeed, in every āyah, and the
combination of these three distinguishes the diction of every āyah and every
sūrah from the words of ordinary humans. By this there is a challenge [to
opponents] and inimitability. Every sūrah has these three, although other
aspects of the ten may be ascribed to it as well. Sūrat al-Kawthar (108)
consists of only three short āyahs, being the shortest sūrah in the Qur’an, and
it contains reports about the unseen matters: about Kawthar and its
immensity and abundance which indicates that the Prophet g will have the
greatest number of Followers. The second is about al-Walīd ibn al-
Mughīrah, who was a wealthy man with many children when this was
revealed (74:11), and then later he was destroyed.
– The Arabic usage used in it is beyond what any Arab could master and
they all agree that it is correct, with every word and letter in its proper place.
– It talks of matters which occurred from the beginning of the world until
the time of its revelations, all this issuing from the mouth of someone
illiterate who could neither read nor write. It reports about the stories of
Prophets with their communities and past generations as well as those
matters the People of the Book asked about when they challenged him
about the People of the Cave, al-Khiḍr and Mūsā, and Dhū ’l-Qarnayn.
Qāḍī ibn aṭ-Ṭayyib points out that we know that there was no way for him
to learn this because he did not have contact with people with knowledge of
history, or frequent a teacher, so that he could take from them, and so it is
known that it could only have come by way of revelation.
– There is the fulfilment of Allah’s promises which were visually perceived
in all that He promised in the Qur’an. That is divided into general reports,

 like promising His Messenger g victory and expelling those who expelled
him, and promises which have preconditions like, ‘If someone trusts in Allah, He
is enough for him’ (65:3), ‘Whoever believes in Allah – He will guide his heart’ (64:11),
‘Whoever has taqwā in Allah – He will give him a way out’ (65:2) ‘If there are twenty of
you who are steadfast, they will overcome two hundred.’ (8:65), and other examples.
– There are reports about unseen matters in the future which could only
be known by revelation. Part of that is Allah’s promise to His Prophet g
that his dīn would overcome all other religions when He says, ‘It is He Who
sent His Messenger with the Guidance and the Dīn of Truth’ (48:28), as happened.
When Abū Bakr sent his armies on expeditions, he would inform them of
Allah’s promise to make His dīn victorious so that they would be confident
of victory and certain of success. ‘Umar also did that, and the conquests
continued in the east and west. Allah says, ‘Allah has promised those of you who
believe and do right actions that He will make them the successors in the land as He made
those before them the successors.’ (24:55) He said, ‘Allah has confirmed His
Messenger’s vision with truth: “You will enter the Masjid al-Ḥarām in safety”’ (48:27)
and ‘Alif Lām Mīm. The Romans have been defeated in the land nearby, but after their
defeat they will themselves be victorious.’ (30:1-3) All of these are reports about
unseen matters which only the Lord of all the Worlds knows or someone
whom the Lord of the Worlds gives to know. This indicates that Allah
informed His Messenger g about them so that it would be a proof of his
truthfulness.
– There is the knowledge that the Qur’an contains, which is the basis for
all people regarding the lawful and unlawful and other rulings.
– There are eloquent expressions of wisdom which do not normally issue
from a human being.
– The perfect symmetry of the entire Qur’an, outward and inward without
disparity or inconsistency, is a final factor. Allah says, ‘If it had been from other
than Allah, they would have found many inconsistencies in it.’ (4:82)
These are ten points mentioned by our scholars, and an eleventh,
mentioned by an-Naẓẓām and some Qadarīs, is that the meaning of
inimitability is the impossibility of opposition and being prevented from
undertaking to meet the challenge. They said that the prohibition and
diverting people from attempting to do that are the miracle rather than the
Qur’an itself. That is because Allah directed their aspirations away from
undertaking the challenge to bring a sūrah like it. This is false because the

 consensus of the community without any disagreement is that Qur’an itself
is the miracle, not the diversion and prohibition, because its eloquence and
lucidity are beyond normal patterns. If there had been any words like it, it
would not be the case. This indicates that the prohibition and diversion are
not the miracle.
They also have two different views about this diversion. One is that they
were diverted from the ability to do it. If they had attempted it, they would
have lacked the power to do it. The second is that they were diverted from
undertaking it although it was within their power and they would have
succeeded had they tried.
Ibn ‘Aṭiyyah said, ‘The substance of the challenge in the Qur’an has to do
with its composition, the soundness of its meanings, and the continuous
eloquence of its phrases. The substance of its inimitability is that Allah
Almighty encompasses all things in knowledge and encompasses all words in
His knowledge. By His all-encompassing knowledge, He knows which word
is proper for following another and how to make clear one meaning after
another. That is the case from the beginning of the Qur’an to the end of it.
Human beings are subject to ignorance, forgetfulness and distraction. It is
an indisputable fact that a human being is not all-encompassing.
‘The composition of the Qur’an has the ultimate eloquence. This
invalidates the position of those who said that the Arabs possessed the ability
to bring the like of the Qur’an in ultimate eloquence, but when Muḥammad
g came, they were diverted from that and unable to do it. What is sound is
that producing something like the Qur’an is not within the power of a
creature. The incapacity of the human becomes obvious to you when one of
them who is eloquent produces a speech or ode exerting all his effort and
continues to work at it for an entire year. Then someone else comes after
him and exerts his own talent and makes alterations in it. That continues to
be done. But were someone to attempt to find a better word for one in the
Qur’an, he would not be able to do that.’
Part of the eloquence of the Qur’an is that in a single āyah Allah mentions
two commands, two prohibitions, two reports and two instances of good
news. That is in ‘We revealed to Mūsā’s mother, “Suckle him and then when you fear
for him cast him into the sea. Do not fear or grieve; We will return him to you and make
him one of the Messengers.”’ (28:7). The same is true of the beginning of Sūrat
al-Mā’idah where He mentions fulfilling contracts, forbids breaking

 contracts, and makes things generally lawful and then after that makes one
exception after another. Then He reports about His wisdom and power.
That is something that only Allah can do. Allah reports about death, grief
over loss, the reward and punishment of the Next Abode, the triumph of the
successful and the ruin of the wrongdoers, cautions against being deluded by
this world and describes it as being insignificant in relation to the Enduring
Abode in ‘Every self will taste death. You will be paid your wages in full on the Day of
Rising. Anyone who is distanced from the Fire and admitted to the Garden has triumphed.
The life of this world is just the enjoyment of delusion.’ (3:185). He also reports
about the stories of the first and the last, the end of the affluent and
outcome of those who were destroyed in half of an āyah in ‘Against some We
sent a sudden squall of stones; some of them were seized by the Great Blast; some We
caused the earth to swallow up; and some We drowned.’ (29:40). He reported about
the Ship, its sailing, the destruction of the unbelievers, the coming to rest
and landing of the Ship and directing commands of subjugation to the
heaven and the earth in ‘He said, ‘Embark in it. In the name of Allah be its voyage
and its landing! … And it was said, ‘Away with the people of the wrongdoers!’’ (11:41-
44).
When Quraysh were unable to produce anything like it, they said that the
Prophet g had fabricated it. So Allah revealed: ‘Or do they say, “He has simply
made it up?’ No, the truth is they do not believe. Let them produce a discourse like it if they
are telling the truth.’ (52:33-34) Then He revealed something that revealed
their incapacity even more: ‘Or do they say, “He has invented it”? Say, “Then
produced ten invented sūrahs like this.’ (11:13) When they were still unable to do
that, He decreased the amount to something like one of the short sūrahs and
said, ‘If you have doubts about what We have sent down to Our slave, produce another
sūrah equal to it.’ (2:23) They were unable to respond and that was the end of
it. So they resorted to war and obstinacy and preferred the capture of
women and children. If they had been able to respond, it would have been
far easier, a stronger argument, and would have had greater effect. They
could not respond although they were masters of rhetoric and composition
and were the source of eloquence in language.
The eloquence (balāghah) of the Qur’an possesses the highest levels of
excellence and most elevated degrees of concision and clarity. Indeed, it
exceeds the limits of excellence, to the sphere of masters and beyond.
Although the Messenger of Allah g was given concise meaningful

 expressions, rare wisdoms, which you will see when you reflect on what he
said in describing the Garden, and extreme excellence in language, that falls
short of the rank of the Qur’an. The Prophet g said, ‘In it is what no eye
has seen, no ear has heard, and has not occurred to the heart of man.’ See
where that is in relation to the words of the Almighty: ‘They will have there all
that their hearts desire and their eyes find delight in’ (43:71) and ‘No self knows the
delight that is hidden away for it.’ (32:17)
This is the most balanced structure, beautiful composition, and sweet
expression. Furthermore, that is expressed even in the amount of a sūrah or a
longer āyah. That is because whenever the words are long, there is scope for
departure and the words fall short for someone who falls short. So the
argument was won against the Arabs since they were masters of eloquence
and likely to answer back. Similarly in the case of ‘Īsā n, the proof of the
miracle was established against doctors and that of Mūsā n against the
magicians. Allah gave the Prophets miracles in the field in which people
were most skilled at that time so that the Prophet could defeat them. Magic
had reached its peak at the time of Mūsā, medicine in the time of ‘Īsā, and
eloquence at the time of Muḥammad g.

 Information about hadiths forged about the excellence of the
sūrahs of the Qur’an and other matters
No attention should be paid to false hadiths and baseless reports about the
excellence of the sūrahs of the Qur’an and other virtuous actions devised by
forgers and opponents. Many people do this and their goals and aims vary.
Some of them are zindīqs, like al-Mughīrah ibn Sa‘īd al-Kūfī and
Muḥammad ibn Sa‘īd ash-Shāmī. They forged hadiths and used to create
doubt in the hearts of people. One example is what Muḥammad ibn Sa‘īd
related from Anas ibn Mālik about the words of the Prophet g, ‘I am the
seal of the Prophets and there will be no Prophet after me “except as Allah
wishes”.’ He added the exception and that is heresy on his part. This is
mentioned by Ibn ‘Abd ‘l-Barr in the Kitāb at-Tamhīd. The exception is
interpreted to mean dreams, and Allah knows best.
Others forged hadiths to support a sect they were inviting people to join.
One of the Kharijite leaders said after he repented, ‘These hadiths are the
dīn. So look to whom you take your dīn from. When we desired something,
we made up a hadith about it.’
Another group forged hadiths about rewards, calling people to virtuous
actions, as related from Abū ‘Iṣmah Nūḥ ibn Maryam al-Marwazī,
Muḥammad ibn ‘Ukkāshah al-Kirmānī, Aḥmad ibn ‘Abdullāh al-Juwaybārī
and others. Abū ‘Iṣmah was asked, ‘Where did you get what you have from
‘Ikrimah from Ibn ‘Abbās about the virtue of certain sūrahs?’ He replied, ‘I
saw that people were turning from the Qur’an and busying themselves with
the fiqh of Abū Ḥanīfah and the Military Expeditions of Muḥammad ibn Isḥāq
and so I made up this hadith about rewards.’ Abū ‘Amr ‘Uthmān ibn aṣ-
Ṣalāḥ said in the book, ‘Ulūm al-ḥadīth, ‘That is the case with the long hadith
reported from Ubayy ibn Ka‘b from the Prophet g about the virtues of
each sūrah of the Qur’an. Someone investigated its transmission going back
until he reached someone known and a group who forged it and the track of
the forgery is clear with respect to it. The commentator, al-Wāḥidī, and
those who mentioned it erred in using it in their commentaries.
Some beggars who stand in markets and mosques forge hadiths with isnāds
from the Prophet g which they have memorised. They mention these
forged hadiths along with their isnāds. Abū Ja‘far ibn Muḥammad aṭ-
Ṭayālisī said, ‘Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal and Yaḥyā ibn Ma‘īn prayed in the

 Ruṣāfah mosque and a storyteller stood before them and said, “Aḥmad ibn
Ḥanbal and Yaḥyā ibn Ma‘īn related to me from ‘Abd ar-Razzāq from
Ma‘mar from Qatādah from Anas that the Messenger of Allah g said, ‘If
anyone says, “There is no god but Allah,” a bird is created from every word
whose beak is of gold and feathers of coral.’” He began a story which would
cover about twenty pages. Aḥmad looked at Yaḥyā and Yaḥyā looked at
Aḥmad. He asked, “Did you say this?” He said, “By Allah, I only just heard
it at this moment.” They remained silent until he finished his story. Then
Yaḥyā asked him, “Who told you this hadith?” “Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal and
Yaḥyā ibn Ma‘īn,” he replied. He said, “I am Ibn Ma‘īn and this is Aḥmad
ibn Ḥanbal and we have never heard this as being among the hadiths of the
Messenger of Allah g. This must be a lie.” “You are Yaḥyā ibn Ma‘īn?” he
asked. “Yes,” he replied. He said, “I had not heard that Yaḥyā ibn Ma‘īn
was a fool and I did not know it until this moment!” Yaḥyā asked, “And why
do you say that I am a fool?” He replied, “It is not as if there was no Yaḥyā
ibn Ma‘īn and Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal in the world but you two! I have written
from seventeen Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbals other than this.” Aḥmad hid his face in
his sleeve and said, “Let him go.” He went as if he was mocking them.’
These groups and those who follow in their footsteps lie about the
Messenger of Allah g. It is mentioned that ar-Rashīd liked pigeons and
amusing himself [by racing] them. He was give some pigeons while Qāḍī
Abu-l-Bakhtarī was with him. He said, ‘Abū Hurayrah related that the
Prophet g said, “There is only racing with that which has claws, hooves or
wings.”’ He had inserted ‘wings’. He had forged that word for ar-Rashīd. So
he gave him a splendid reward. When he left, ar-Rashīd said, ‘By Allah, I
know that was a lie!’ He ordered that the pigeons be slaughtered. He was
asked, ‘What was the sin of the pigeons?’ He said, ‘It is because they caused
someone to lie about the Messenger of Allah g.’ Therefore scholars
abandoned his hadiths and other things that he forged and scholars did not
record his hadiths at all.
If they had confined themselves to what is established in the Ṣaḥīḥ
collections and Musnads and other books made by scholars related by the
imams, they would have had enough. They abandoned the warning of the
Prophet g, ‘Fear Allah when reporting from other than those you know.
Whoever deliberately lies about me should take his seat in the Fire.’ So he
g warned his Community about lying, indicating that he knew that it

 would happen. His warning was about what is forged by the enemies of
Islam and the zindīqs in respect of encouragement and warning and other
things. Those who do the greatest harm are those who ascribed asceticism
to themselves and forged hadiths about rewards that they claim for it.
People accepted their forgeries and relied on them, and so they were
misguided and misguided others.

 What has come on the refutation of those who attack the Qur’an
and oppose the text of ‘Uthmān by adding to it or removing
some of it
There is no disagreement in the Community among the Imams of the
Sunnah that the Qur’an is the name used to designate the Words of Allah
which Muḥammad g brought as a miracle, as we have said. It is preserved
in the hearts, recited on the tongues, written in the copies of the Qur’an,
and known by necessity in sūrahs and āyahs. It is free of any addition or
increase in words and letters. There is no need for a definition to define it or
number to contain it. Anyone who claims increase or decrease in it has
declared the consensus false and such an action astonishes people. We read
what Allah said about what the Messenger g brought in the Qur’an, ‘Say:
“If both men and jinn banded together to produce the like of this Qur’an, they could never
produce anything like it, even if they backed each other up.”’ (17:88). That is an
attempt to invalidate the Sign of the Messenger because if it had been
something someone was capable of doing, it would not be a proof or a sign
and therefore not a miracle.
Those who say that there is addition or decrease in the Qur’an reject the
Book of Allah and what the Messenger g has brought. It is the same as
someone who states that the obligatory prayers are fifty, one can marry nine
women and that Allah has made it obligatory to fast extra days together
with the days of Ramadan, and so forth. As all of that is refuted by
consensus, so consensus about the Qur’an is more binding and necessary.
Imam Abū Bakr Muḥammad ibn al-Qāsim ibn Bashshār ibn Muḥammad
al-Anbārī said, ‘The people of excellence and intelligence continue to
recognise the nobility of the Qur’an and its high position. This is
necessitated by truth, justice and religion. They deny the statements of
nullifiers and the misrepresentation of atheists, which has led in our time to
grave deviation from religion and an attack on the community in an attempt
to nullify the Sharī‘ah, which Allah continues to support. He makes its roots
firm and its branches grow and guards it against the criticisms of those who
are filled with bias and injustice and against the stratagems of the people of
enmity and unbelief.’
‘Such people claim that the copy of the Qur’an that ‘Uthmān had
transcribed, and which the Companions of the Messenger of Allah g

 agreed was correct, is not complete since five hundred letters are missing
from it. There are also claims that ‘Uthmān and the Companions added to
the Qur’an. They claim that ‘Uthmān was not right in assigning the
transcription of the Qur’an to Zayd ibn Thābit because ‘Abdullāh ibn
Mas‘ūd and Ubayy ibn Ka‘b were more entitled to do that than Zayd, on
account of the fact that the Prophet g said, ‘Ubayy ibn Ka‘b has the
greatest knowledge of recitation in my community,’ and ‘Whoever is happy
to recite the Qur’an fresh as it was revealed should recite the reading of Ibn
Umm ‘Abd.’ Such a person says that he can differ from the Qur’an of
‘Uthman as Abū ‘Amr ibn al-‘Alā’, Ibn Kathīr, Nāfi‘, Ḥamzah and al-Kisā’ī
did in respect of vowelling and doubling of certain letters. These points are
not actual difference from the text as we will mention when it occurs.’
Abū Bakr continued, ‘This person mentioned that Ubayy ibn Ka‘b recited,
“as though it had not been flourishing just the day before and Allah only destroyed it
because of the sins of its people.” This is false because ‘Abdullāh recited to
Mujāhid, Mujāhid recited to Ibn ‘Abbās and Ibn ‘Abbās recited the Qur’an
to Ubayy ibn Ka‘b: “as though it had not been flourishing just the day before! In this
way We make Our Signs clear…” (10:24) In one transmission, Ubayy recited
the Qur’an to the Messenger of Allah g. This isnād is connected to the
Messenger g and transmitted by the people of justice and integrity. When
someone is sound from the Messenger of Allah g, there is no hadith to
dispute it. Yaḥyā ibn al-Mubārak al-Yazīdī said, ‘I recited the Qur’an to
Abū ‘Amr ibn al-‘Alā’ who recited it to Mujāhid who recited it to Ibn ‘Abbās,
and Ibn ‘Abbās recited it to Ubayy ibn Ka‘b who recited it to the Prophet
g. It does not contain “Allah only destroyed it because of the sins of its
people.” Whoever denies that Allah revealed this addition to His Prophet g
is neither an unbeliever nor a sinner.’
Ubayy related from Naṣr ibn Dāwūd aṣ-Ṣāghānī from Abū ‘Ubayd: ‘As for
what is related about letters which disagree with the codex on which there is
consensus which has isnāds, which are particular and not general, that they
transmit from Ubayy the words, “Allah only destroyed it because of the sins
of its people” and from Ibn ‘Abbās “there is nothing wrong in seeking
bounty from your Lord in the festivals of the Hajj,” and what they relate
about ‘Umar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb reciting, “not of those with anger on them, nor
[adding an extra ghayr] of the misguided” as well as many other examples,
the people of knowledge do not transmit that the prayer is valid with them

 nor that they oppose the codex of ‘Uthmān because if anyone denies that
these letters are part of the Qur’an, he is not an unbeliever, but if anyone
denies any part of the Qur’an collected by ‘Uthmān with the agreement of
the Companions, then he is an unbeliever and his ruling is that of an
apostate who is asked to repent. If he does not repent, he is executed.’
Abū ‘Ubayd said, ‘What ‘Uthmān did in transcribing the Qur’an is still
considered to be one of his great virtuous actions. Some of the people of
deviation attack it in order to look for his faults. Yazīd ibn Zuray‘ related
from ‘Imrān ibn Jarīr that Abū Miljaz said, “People attacked ‘Uthmān h
for his foolishness in collecting the Qur’an and then they read what was
abrogated.” Abū ‘Ubayd said that Abū Miljaz believed that ‘Uthmān
omitted what he omitted based on knowledge, as he confirmed what he
confirmed, based on knowledge.’
Abū Bakr said, ‘The unbelief of the person who said this [about the codex
of ‘Uthmān] is indicated by His words, “It is We Who have sent down the
Reminder and We Who will preserve it” (15:9) because Allah has preserved the
Qur’an from change and alteration and from addition or decrease. When
someone recites the sūrah, “Ruin to the hands of Abū Lahab and ruin to him!” (111)
and says “wa murayyatuhu” instead of “wa-mra’atuhu”, and “layf” instead of
“masad”, he has denied Allah and said that He said what He did not say and
altered and changed His Book. He is laying down the path for the people of
atheism who want to insert into the Qur’an what will permit Islam to be
stripped away. They ascribe it to like-minded people who are trying to foist
these falsehoods on them and to nullify the consensus which guards Islam
on whose basis the prayers are established, zakāt is paid and worship
attended to.
‘The words of the Almighty, “Alif-Lām-Rā’. A Book whose āyahs are perfectly
constructed” (11:1) contain evidence of the innovation of this person and his
departure into unbelief because the meaning of “whose āyahs are perfectly
constructed” prevents creatures from having the power to add to it or decrease
it or to falsely ascribe anything to it.’

 Seeking Refuge with Allah from Shayṭān
Allah orders people to seek refuge at the beginning of every recitation
when He says, ‘Whenever you recite the Qur’an, seek refuge with Allah from the cursed
Shayṭān.’ (16:98) This command is a recommendation, according to the
position of the majority, for every time of recitation other than the prayer.
There is disagreement where the prayer is concerned. An-Naqqāsh reported
from ‘Aṭā’ that seeking refuge is mandatory in it. Ibn Sīrīn, Ibrahim an-
Nakha‘ī and some other people sought refuge in the prayer in every rak‘ah
and treated the command of Allah to seek refuge as applying in every case.
Abū Ḥanīfah and ash-Shāfi‘ī sought refuge in the first rak‘ah of the prayer
and considered all the recitation during the prayer to constitute a single act
of recitation. Mālik did not think that there was any need to seek refuge in
the obligatory prayers but thought it should be done in night prayers in
Ramadan.
Scholars agree that the formula of seeking refuge is not part of the Qur’an
nor an āyah of it. It is the words of the reciter, ‘A‘ūdhu bi-llāhi mina-sh-shayṭāni-
r-rajīm (I seek refuge with Allah from the Accursed Shayṭān).’ This formula
is that on which the majority of scholars agree because it concurs with the
expression in the Book of Allah. It is related that Ibn Mas‘ūd said, ‘I say, “I
seek refuge with Allah, the All-Hearing, All-Knowing from the accursed
Shayṭān.”’ The Prophet g said to him, ‘Ibn Umm ‘Abd, I seek refuge with
Allah from the accursed Shayṭān as Jibrīl read it to me from the Preserved
Tablet from the Pen.’
Abū Dāwūd and Ibn Mājah related in their Sunan collections that Jubayr
ibn Muṭ‘im saw the Messenger of Allah g praying. (‘Amr said, ‘I do not
know which prayer it was.’) He said, ‘Allah is very much greater. Allah is
very much greater (three times). Praise be to Allah Abundantly. Praise be to
Allah Abundantly (three times) Glory be to Allah morning and evening
(three times). I seek refuge with Allah from Shayṭān and his blowing, spitting
and spurring.’ Spurring is madness, spitting is poetry and blowing is pride.
Ibn Mājah said that madness is insanity, spitting is when a man expels air
through his mouth without spittle, and pride is haughtiness.
Abū Dāwūd also related that Abū Sa‘īd al-Khudrī said that when the
Messenger of Allah g rose at night, he would say the takbīr and then say,
‘Glory be to You, O Allah, and by Your praise. Blessed is Your Name and

 exalted are You. There is no god but You.’ Then he said, ‘There is no god
but Allah’ three times, ‘Allah is very great’ three times, and ‘I seek refuge
with Allah, the All-Hearing, all-Knowing from the Accursed Shayṭān from
his spurring, blowing and spitting.’ Then he would recite.
Sulaymān ibn Sālim related from Ibn al-Qāsim that the seeking refuge
formula is: ‘I seek refuge with Allah, the Immense from the Accursed
Shayṭān. Allah is the All-Hearing, All-Knowing. In the Name of Allah, the All-
Merciful, Most Merciful.’ Ibn ‘Aṭiyyah stated, ‘Those who recite often change
the attribute of the Name of Allah and that of the other, as when one says “I
seek refuge with Allah the Glorious from the rebellious Shayṭān,” and the
like. I do not say that this is a good innovation nor that it is not permitted.’
Al-Mahdawī said, ‘The reciters agree about reciting the seeking refuge
formula at the beginning of the Fātiḥah except for Ḥamzah who does it
silently. As-Suddī related that the people of Madīnah used to begin
recitation with the basmalah. As-Samarqandī related from some of the
commentators that seeking refuge is an obligation. When the reciter forgets
it and then remembers at some point in his recitation, he stops and seeks
refuge and then begins from the beginning again. One of them said that he
seeks refuge and then returns to where he stopped. The first is the position
of the authorities of the Hijaz and Iraq and the second is that of the
authorities of Syria and Egypt.’
Az-Zahrawī said, ‘The āyah was revealed about the prayer, and it was
recommended to seek refuge outside the prayer, but it is not an obligation.’
Another said, ‘It was an obligation only for the Prophet g and we emulate
him.’
If it is asked, ‘What is the benefit of seeking refuge from the Accursed
Shayṭān at the time of recitation?’ the reply is that the benefit lies in obeying
the command. The only benefit of prescribed matters lies in obeying them if
they are commands or avoiding them if they are prohibitions. It is said that
its benefit is to obey the command to seek refuge from the whispering of
Shayṭān in recitation as Allah says, ‘We did not send any Messenger or any Prophet
before you without Shayṭān insinuating something into his recitation while he was
reciting.’ (22:50).
Ibn al-‘Arabī said, ‘Very strange is what we find of the words of Mālik in
the Collection (Majmū‘ah) regarding the commentary on this āyah, “Whenever
you recite the Qur’an, seek refuge with Allah from the cursed Shayṭān” (16:98) when he

 says, “That is after the recitation of the Umm al-Qur’ān for the one who
recites in the prayer.” This position has no effect and investigation does not
support it. If it is as some people say about seeking refuge being after the
recitation, it specifies that that comes after the Fātiḥah in the prayer. That is
a tremendous claim and does not resemble the basic principle or
understanding of Mālik. Allah best knows the secret of this transmission.’
Regarding the excellence of seeking refuge, Muslim related that Sulaymān
ibn Ṣurad said, ‘Two men were quarrelling in the presence of the Prophet
g. One of them became angry and his face turned red and his veins stood
out. The Prophet g looked at him and said, “I know a statement which, if
you say it, will remove what you feel: ‘I seek refuge with Allah from the
accursed Shayṭān.’” A man who had heard the Prophet g went to the man
and said, “Do you know what the Messenger of Allah g said? He said, ‘I
know a statement which, if you say it, will remove what you feel: “I seek
refuge with Allah from the accursed Shayṭān.”’” The man said to him, “Do
you think I am mad?”’ Al-Bukhārī transmitted it.
Muslim reported that ‘Uthman ibn Abi-l-‘Āṣ said, ‘I went to the Prophet
g and said, “Messenger of Allah, Shayṭān comes between me and my
prayer and recitation and confuses me.” He said, “That is a Shayṭān called
Khinzab. When you feel that, seek refuge in Allah from him and spit to your
left three times.” I did that and Allah removed it from me.’
Abū Dāwūd reported that Ibn ‘Umar said, ‘When the Messenger of Allah
g travelled, and night was coming he said, “O earth, my Lord and your
Lord is Allah. I seek refuge with Allah from your evil and the evil of what
He creates in you, from the evil of what crawls on you, from the lion and the
black scorpion, from snakes and scorpions and the dwellers of the land, and
a parent and what he begets.”’
Khawlah bint Ḥakīm reported that she heard the Messenger of Allah g
say, ‘If anyone makes camp and then says, “I seek refuge with the complete
words of Allah from the evil of what He created,” he will not be harmed by
anything until he sets out again.’ The Muwaṭṭā’, Muslim and at-Tirmidhī
transmitted it. He said that it is a sound ḥasan gharīb hadith. Seeking refuge is
found and confirmed in many reports. Allah is the One Who is asked for
help.
The seeking refuge formula (isti‘ādhah) in Arabic is seeking protection in
something so that it will guard a person against what he dislikes. The terms

 ‘awdhāh, mu‘ādhah and ta‘wīdh have the same meaning.
Shayṭān is the singular of shayāṭīn. The name ‘Shayṭān’ comes from a root
(shaṭana) which means to be far from good. Shaṭūn is a deep well. Shaṭan is a
long rope. It is called that because its ends are far from one another. The
Arabs describe a refractory horse as a shayṭān. Shayṭān himself is called that
because he is far from the truth and is rebellious; and the word is used for
every rebellious one among the jinn and animals. It is said that ‘Shayṭān’ is
derived from the verb shāṭa which is a word used for someone who is
destroyed or burned. Ar-rajīm (accursed) means to be far from good and
humiliated. Its root means ‘stoning’. ‘Stoning’ is a metaphor for killing,
cursing, exile and abuse. All of this is found in the words of the Almighty:
‘They said, “Nūḥ, if you do not desist, you will be stoned’” (26:116) and the words of
Ibrāhīm’s father: ‘If you do not stop, I will stone you.’ (19:46)
Al-A‘mash related from Abū Wā’il from ‘Abdullāh that ‘Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib
said, ‘I saw the Messenger of Allah g at Ṣafā, facing an individual in the
form of an elephant whom he was cursing. I asked, “Who are you cursing,
Messenger of Allah?” He replied, “This is the accursed Shayṭān.” I said,
“Enemy of Allah, by Allah, I will kill you and relieve the Community of
you!” He said, “This is not my repayment from you.” I asked, “And what is
your repayment from me, enemy of Allah?” He said, “By Allah, no one will
hate you at all unless I had a share of him with his father in his mother’s
womb.”’

 The Basmalah
(In the Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, the Most Merciful)
Scholars say that ‘By the Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, Most Merciful!’ is an
oath from our Lord, which He revealed at the beginning of every sūrah. By
it, He swears to His slaves, ‘What I have laid down for you, My slaves, in this
sūrah is true. I will fulfil for you all that I guarantee in this sūrah of My
promise, kindness and gentleness.’ ‘In the Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, Most
Merciful’ is part of what Allah revealed in His Book, and this is special for
this Community after Sulaymān. Some scholars say that ‘In the Name of Allah,
the All-Merciful, Most Merciful’ contains all the Sharī‘ah because it indicates
the Essence and the Attributes. This is sound.
Sa‘īd ibn Abī Sakīnah said that he heard that ‘Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib looked at a
man who was writing ‘In the Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, Most Merciful,’ and
told him, ‘Do it well. If a man does it well, he will be forgiven.’ Sa‘īd said, ‘I
heard that a man looked at a parchment on which was written “In the Name
of Allah, the All-Merciful, Most Merciful,” and kissed it and placed it on his eyes
and was forgiven on account of that.’ There is a similar story from Bishr al-
Ḥāfī. When he picked up a rag on which was ‘the Name of Allah’ and
perfumed it, his own name became honoured. Al-Qushayrī mentioned that.
An-Nasā’ī reports from Abu-l-Malīḥ about a man who rode behind the
Messenger of Allah that he mentioned that the Messenger of Allah g said,
‘When your animal stumbles with you, do not say, “Shayṭān has made it
stumble!” because that puffs him up him until he becomes like a house and
says with strength, “I have done it.” Rather say, “In the Name of Allah, the All-
Merciful, Most Merciful” and Shayṭān will become small until he is no bigger
than a fly.’
‘Alī ibn al-Ḥasan said about the words of the Almighty, ‘When you mention
your Lord alone in the Qur’an, they turn their backs in flight’ (17:46): ‘That refers to
when you say, “In the Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, Most Merciful.”’ Wakī‘
reported from al-A‘mash from Abū Wā’il that ‘Abdullāh ibn Mas‘ūd said,
‘Whoever wants Allah to rescue him from the nineteen Zabāniyyah should
recite, “In the Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, Most Merciful” so that Allah will
make each letter a shield for him against one of them. The basmalah contains
nineteen letters which is the same as the number of the angels of the Fire
who Allah says are also nineteen. (74:30) They say in all that they do, “In the

 Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, Most Merciful. That is their strength and they
take their strength from the name of Allah.’
Ibn ‘Aṭiyyah said, ‘The same as this is said about the Night of the Decree
being the 27th night, taking note of the position the word “hiya” in the
words of the sūrah, al-Qadr (97:1-5). [It is the twenty-seventh word in the
sūrah.] And also what they say about the number of angels who hastened to
report the words of the one who said, “My Lord, praise is Yours, abundant,
excellent and blessed,” [after rising from rukū‘ when the Prophet g said,
‘Allah hears the one who praises Him.’] It is about thirty letters. That is why
the Prophet g said, “I saw about thirty angels racing to see which would be
the first to write it down.”’ Ibn ‘Aṭiyyah added, ‘This is an elegant tafsīr, but
not a firm tafsīr.’
Ash-Sha‘bī and al-A‘mash reported that the Messenger of Allah g used to
write, ‘In Your Name, O Allah’ until he was commanded to write ‘In the
Name of Allah,’ and then he wrote that. When it was revealed, ‘Say: “Call on
Allah or call on the All-Merciful”’ (17:109), he wrote, ‘In the Name of Allah, the
All-Merciful.’ When there was revealed, ‘It is from Sulaymān and says, “In the
Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, Most Merciful”’ (27:30), he wrote that. In Abū
Dāwūd, ash-Sha‘bī, Abū Mālik, Qatādah and Thābit ibn ‘Umārah said that
the Prophet g did not write ‘In the Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, Most
Merciful’ until Sūrat an-Naml (27) was revealed.
It is reported that Ja‘far aṣ-Ṣādiq said that the basmalah is the crown of the
sūrahs. This indicates that it is not an āyah of the Fātiḥah or other sūrahs.
People disagree about this and have three positions regarding it.
– It is not an āyah of the Fātiḥah or any other sūrah. This is the position of
Mālik.
– It is an āyah of every sūrah, and this is the position of ‘Abdullāh ibn al-
Mubārak.
– Ash-Shāfi‘ī said that it is an āyah of the Fātiḥah and what he says about
the other sūrahs varies. Sometimes he says that it is an āyah of every sūrah and
sometimes that it is only one of the Fātiḥah. There is no disagreement that it
is an āyah of the Qur’an inside Sūrat an-Naml.
Ash-Shāfi‘ī’s evidence is what ad-Dāraquṭnī related from Abū Bakr al-
Ḥanafī from ‘Abd al-Ḥamīd ibn Ja‘far from Nūḥ ibn Abī Bilāl from Sa‘īd
ibn Abī Sa‘īd al-Maqburī from Abū Hurayrah that the Prophet g said,
‘When you read “Praise belongs to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds,” then first

 recite “In the Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, Most Merciful”. It is the Mother of
the Qur’an, the Mother of the Book, and the Seven Mathānī. “In the Name of
Allah, the All-Merciful, Most Merciful” is one of its āyahs.’
The evidence of Ibn al-Mubārak and one of the positions of ash-Shāfi‘ī is
what Muslim reports from Anas: ‘One day while the Messenger of Allah g
was among us he nodded off and then he raised his head smiling. We asked,
“What has made you smile, Messenger of Allah?” He replied, “A sūrah was
just revealed to me. It is: ‘In the Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, Most Merciful.
Truly We have given you the Great Abundance. So pray to your Lord and sacrifice. It is
the one who hates you who is cut off without an heir.’” (108)’
The sound position is that of Mālik because the Qur’an is not established
by single reports, but by way of definitive multiple transmission about which
there is no disagreement. Ibn al-‘Arabī said, ‘It is enough for you that there
is no disagreement between people about the Qur’an. There is no
disagreement about the Qur’an.’ Sound reports which cannot be attacked
indicate that the basmalah is not an āyah of al-Fātiḥah or any other sūrah
except for Sūrat an-Naml. Muslim reported that Abū Hurayrah said, ‘I
heard the Messenger of Allah g say, “Allah says, ‘I have divided the prayer
into two halves between Me and My slave, and My slave will have what he
asks for.’ When My slave says, ‘Praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds,’ Allah
says, ‘My slave has praised Me.’ He says, ‘the All-Merciful, the Most Merciful,’
and the Lord says, ‘My slave has lauded Me.’ My slave says, ‘the King of the
Day of Judgement,’ and Allah says, ‘My slave has magnified Me (or entrusted
to Me).’ The slave says, ‘You alone we worship. You alone we ask for help,’ and
Allah says, ‘This is between Me and My slave and My slave will have what
He asks for.’ The slave says, ‘Guide us on the Straight Path, the Path of those whom
You have blessed, not of those with anger on them, nor of the misguided,’ and Allah
says, ‘Those are for My slave and My slave will have what He asks for.’”’
Allah said, ‘I have divided the prayer’, meaning the Fātiḥah, and he called
it ‘prayer’ because the prayer is not valid except with it. So He designated
the first three āyahs for Himself, singling them out for Himself, and the
Muslims do not disagree about that. Then he made the fourth between Him
and His slave because it contains the abasement of the slave and seeking
help from Him. That contains esteem for Allah. Then three āyahs conclude
the seven. They are definitely three, because He uses the plural, not the dual
in ‘Those are for My slave,’ So ‘those You have blessed’ is an āyah. Ibn Bukayr

 reported that Mālik said that ‘those You have blessed’ is an āyah.
This is confirmed by the division and by what the Prophet g said to
Ubayy when he asked Ubayy, ‘How do you recite when you begin the
prayer?’ He replied, ‘I recited, “Praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds” to
the end.’ The basmalah was not part of it. That was the position of the
people of Madīnah, the people of Syria and the people of Basra. Most
reciters counted ‘those You have blessed’ as an āyah. This is also related from
Abū Naḍrah from Abū Hurayrah who said that the sixth āyah is ‘those You
have blessed’. The people of Kufa count the basmalah as part of it and do not
count ‘those You have blessed’.
If it is said that it is confirmed in the copies of the Qur’an that the basmalah
is written and transmitted, as it is transmitted in an-Naml, and that this is
multiple transmission, we reply that that is sound, but is it is because it is
Qur’an, or is it a divider between sūrahs as is related from the Companions,
‘We did not know the end of the sūrah until “In the Name of Allah, the All-
Merciful, Most Merciful’ was revealed.”’ (Abū Dāwūd)? Or it may be for the
blessing, in the same way that the Community agrees to write it at the
beginning of books and letters. All of that is possible. Al-Jurayrī said, ‘Al-
Ḥasan was asked about “In the Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, Most Merciful”
and said “At the beginning of letters.”’ He also said, ‘“In the Name of Allah, the
All-Merciful, Most Merciful” was not revealed in any of the Qur’an except an-
Naml.’ The criterion is that the Qur’an is not established by logic and
deduction. It is established by definitive multiple transmission. So the
statement of ash-Shāfi‘ī about the basmalah being at that beginning of each
sūrah is unsound because the basmalah is not an āyah of each sūrah. Praise
belongs to Allah.
It is reported that a group related that the basmalahs are part of the Qur’an.
Ad-Dāraquṭnī dealt with all of that. We do not deny the transmission of that
and we have indicated it, but we have firm reports which counter it which
are related by reliable imams and fuqahā’. In Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim ‘Ā’ishah is
reported as saying, ‘The Messenger of Allah g used to begin the prayer
with the takbīr and the recitation of “Praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the
worlds.”’ Muslim also reported that Anas ibn Mālik said, ‘I prayed behind
the Prophet g, Abū Bakr and ‘Umar, and they began with “Praise be to
Allah.” They did not mention “In the Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, Most
Merciful”, either at the beginning or the end of recitation.’

 So our school prefers that, and it is logical. That is because the Mosque of
the Prophet g in Madīnah passed through many years from the time of the
Messenger of Allah g, until the time of Mālik and during all that time,
following the Sunnah, no one recited, ‘In the Name of Allah, the All-Merciful,
Most Merciful’. This refutes the hadiths you cite. Our people, however, prefer
to recite it in the voluntary prayers, and there are traditions (āthār) about
reciting it or an allowance for doing that. Mālik said, ‘There is no harm in
reciting it in the nāfilah or when simply reading the Qur’an.’
A group of the school of Mālik and his people said that it is not part of the
Fātiḥah or any other sūrah, and it is not recited by the one who prays the
obligatory or any other prayer, either silently or aloud. It is permitted to
recite it in nāfilah prayers. This is well-known in his school and with his
people. There is another transmission that it is recited at the beginning of
the sūrah in nāfilah prayers but not at the beginning of the Fātiḥah. It is
related that Ibn Nāfi‘ began his recitation with it in the obligatory and
nāfilah prayers and did not ever omit it. Some of the people of Madīnah say
that there must be ‘In the Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, Most Merciful,’ among
them Ibn ‘Umar and Ibn Shihāb. Ash-Shāfi‘ī, Aḥmad, Isḥāq, Abū Thawr
and Abū ‘Ubayd said that. That indicates that it is a matter of ijtihād and not
definitive, as some ignorant individuals claim.
Another group of scholars believe that it is recited silently with the Fātiḥah.
They include Abū Ḥanīfah and ath-Thawrī. That is related from ‘Umar,
‘Alī, Ibn Mas‘ūd, ‘Ammār and Ibn az-Zubayr. It is also the view of al-
Ḥakam and Ḥammād, and it is stated by Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal and Abū
‘Ubayd. Something similar to that is related from al-Awzā‘ī. The evidence
for that is the report from Anas ibn Mālik: ‘The Messenger of Allah g led
us in the prayer and we did not hear him recite, “In the Name of Allah, the All-
Merciful, Most Merciful.”’
This is a good position, and the traditions (āthār) reported from Anas agree
on it and remove the disagreement about the recitation of the basmalah. It is
related that Sa‘īd ibn Jubayr said, ‘The idolaters used to come to the
mosque. When the Messenger of Allah g recited, “In the Name of Allah, the
All-Merciful, Most Merciful,” they said, “This Muḥammad mentioned the
Raḥmān of Yamāmah,” meaning Musaylimah. So he was commanded to
recite it silently and it was revealed, “Do not be too loud in your prayer or too quiet
in it.” (17:110)’ At-Tirmidhī al-Ḥakīm said, ‘That has lasted until now, even

 if the cause no longer exists, as running remains in ṭawāf even if the cause no
longer exists and silence in the day prayers even if the cause no longer
exists.’
The Community agree that it is permitted to write it at the beginning of
every book of knowledge and letter. If it is a volume of poetry, Mujālid
related that ash-Sha‘bī said, ‘The consensus is that they do not write “In the
Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, Most Merciful” before poetry.’ Az-Zuhrī said,
‘The sunnah is not to write “In the Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, Most
Merciful” in poetry.’ Sa‘īd ibn Jubayr believed that it is written in the front of
books of poetry and many later scholars corroborate that. Abū Bakr al-
Khaṭīb said, ‘That is our choice and what we prefer.’
Al-Māwardī said that someone who says, ‘bismi-llāh’ is called a ‘mubasmil’.
The term is used in poetry. What is famous in language is [to use the verb]
basmala. Ya‘qūb ibn as-Sakīt, al-Muṭawwir, ath-Tha‘ālabī and others said
that basmala is the verb for someone saying ‘bismi-llāh’ or when he says it
often.
The Sharī‘ah recommends mentioning the basmalah at the beginning of
every action, like eating, drinking, slaughtering, sexual intercourse,
purification, embarking on a ship and the like. Allah says, ‘Eat that over which
the name of Allah has been mentioned’ (6:119) and He said, ‘Embark in it. In the
name of Allah be its voyage and its landing!’ (11:41) The Prophet g said, ‘Lock
your door and mention the Name of Allah. Put out your lamp and mention
the Name of Allah. Cover your vessel and mention the Name of Allah. Tie
up your water-skin and mention the Name of Allah.’ He said, ‘If anyone of
you wants to go to his wife, he should say, “In the Name of Allah. O Allah,
keep Shayṭān away from us and keep Shayṭān away from what You provide
us with.” If a child is decreed for them, Shayṭān will not harm him at all.’
He told ‘Umar ibn Abī Salamah, ‘Boy, say the name of Allah Almighty and
eat with your right hand and eat what is in front of you.’ He said, ‘Shayṭān
considers food lawful when the Name of Allah is not mentioned over it.’ He
said, ‘Whoever has not slaughtered should slaughter in the Name of Allah.’
When ‘Uthmān ibn Abi-l-‘Āṣ complained to him of a pain he had in his
body since he had become Muslim, the Messenger of Allah g said to him,
‘Place your hand on that part of your body which pains you and say “In the
Name of Allah” three times and then say seven times, “I seek refuge in the
might and power of Allah from the evil of what I feel and am on my guard

 against.”’ All of this is confirmed in the Ṣaḥīḥ. Ibn Mājah and at-Tirmidhī
report that the Prophet g said, ‘The veil between the jinn and the private
parts of the sons of Ādam when he enters the privy is to say, “In the Name
of Allah.”’ Ad-Dāraquṭnī reported that ‘Ā’ishah said, ‘When the Prophet g
touched his wuḍū’ vessel, he said the Name of Allah and then poured the
water on his hands.’ Our scholars say that this refutes the Qadarites and
others who say that our actions are decreed by them. The argument against
them in that is that Allah commanded us to begin every action with the
basmalah.
The meaning of ‘In the Name of Allah’ is ‘by Allah’, and the meaning of
‘by Allah’ is by His creating and decreeing one reaches whatever one
reaches. Some say that ‘In the Name of Allah’ means ‘I begin with the help,
success and blessing of Allah.’ This is Allah teaching His slaves to mention
His Name at the beginning of recitation and other actions so that one begins
with the blessing of Allah.
There is disagreement about the meaning of adding ‘ism’ (‘the name of’).
Quṭrub said that it is added to increase the esteem and respect of
mentioning Allah Almighty. Al-Akhfash said that it is added to remove it
from the possibility of being an oath to being a prayer for blessing, since the
root is ‘bi-llāh’. They also disagree about the meaning of adding the bā’ (‘in’,
‘with’). Does it have the meaning of a command so that it implies: ‘Begin
with the Name of Allah.’ Or is it a report which implies: ‘I have begun with
the Name of Allah.” Al-Farrā’ takes the first view and az-Zajjāj takes the
second. In both views it is in the accusative case. It is said that it means: ‘My
beginning is in the Name of Allah.’ ‘Bismillāh’ is written without the alif of
‘ism’ as there is no need of it when the bā’ is connected to the written word
because it is a frequent usage.
There is disagreement about the derivation of ism (name), with two basic
positions. The Basrans say that it is derived from sumuw, which means height
and elevation. It is said that ism means that the person is in an elevated
place. It is said that the name lifts the named above others. It is said that the
name is called that because it is higher than the other parts of speech by its
strength. The noun (ism) is stronger by agreement because it is the root.
These are three statements.
The Kufans say that it is derived from simah, which means a sign, because
the Name is a sign of the One to whom it is given. So the root of ism is

 wasam. The first is sounder because of the form of the diminutive (sumayy)
and the form of the plural which is asmā’. Another disagreement indicates
the soundness of that, and it is the next point.
If it is true that ism is derived from height, Allah was described by it before
creation existed, after it existed and will be when it is annihilated, and
creatures have no effect on the Names or Attributes. This is the position of
the people of the Sunnah. Those who say that it is derived from simah say
that before time Allah was without name or attribute. When He created
creatures, they gave Him Names and Attributes. When He annihilates them,
He will again have no name or attribute. This is the position of the
Mu‘tazilites, and it is contrary to that on which the Community agree. It is
worse than their error when they say, ‘His Word is created.’ Exalted above
that is Allah! It is according to this that there is a disagreement about the
Name and Named.
The people of truth believe, as Qāḍī Abū Bakr ibn aṭ-Ṭayyib al-Bāqillānī
mentioned, that the name is the thing named and Ibn Fūrak is content with
that. It is the position of Abū ‘Abīdah and Sībawayh. If someone says ‘Allah
is Knowing’, his words indicate the Essence, which is described as being
knowing. So the Name is Knowing and it is what is Named. It is the same
when someone says, ‘Allah is the Creator.’ The Creator is the Lord and it is
the Name itself. So their view is that the Name is the Named itself with no
distinction.
Ibn Ḥaṣṣār said, ‘Those among the innovators who deny the attributes
claim that namings have no meaning except the Essence. That is why they
say that the Name is not the Named. Whoever affirms the Attributes,
affirms that the names have meanings which are qualities of the Essence.
They are not expressions, but they are Names in their view.’ More of this
will come in al-Baqarah and al-A‘rāf.
Allah is the greatest and most comprehensive of all the Names, so that one
scholar said that it is the Greatest Name of Allah and no one else has it.
That is why it has no dual or plural. That is one of two interpretations of the
words of the Almighty, ‘Do you know of any other with His Name?’ (19:65), in
other words, is there anyone named with His Name which is Allah? Allah is
the Name of the True Existent who has all the Divine Attributes and is
described as Lord and alone possesses real existence. There is no god but
Him. Glory be to Him! It is said that it means the One who alone is worthy

 of worship. It is said that it means the One whose existence is necessary who
always was and always will be. The meaning is the same.
There is disagreement about whether this Name is etymologically derived
or a unique designation for the Divine Essence. Many of the people of
knowledge believe the first but then disagree on its actual derivation and
root. Sībawayh reported from al-Khalīl that its root is ilāh, on the measure
of fi‘āl. The alif and lām replace the hamzah. Sībawayh said that it is like an-
nās (people) whose root is unās. It is said that its root is lāh and the alif and
lām are added to exalt it. This is what Sībawayh preferred. Al-Kisā‘ī and al-
Farrā’ said that ‘bismillāh’ is made up of ‘bismi – al-ilāh’ and elision has
occurred and the first lām assimilated into the second and so becomes a
double lām.
It is said that the name Allah is derived from walaha, to be bewildered.
Walah means loss of intellect, and someone who is wālih is bewildered. Allah
bewilders minds when they think on the realities of His attributes and reflect
on gnosis of Him. So the basis of this ilāh is walāh and the hamzah is changed
from the wāw. That is also reported from al-Khalīl. It is related that aḍ-
Ḍaḥḥāk said, ‘Allah is called a God because creatures devote (ta‘allaha)
themselves to Him in their needs and make supplication to Him in times of
hardship.’ It is related that al-Khalīl ibn Aḥmad said something similar. It is
also said that it is derived from elevation and that the Arabs used to use lāh
for something elevated and they used the verb (lāhat) for sunrise.
It is said that the name Allah is derived from the word ilāh (god), which
means what a man worships as He says, ‘abandon you and your gods (ālihataka).’
(7:127) They said that it means ‘your worship’. They said that the name
‘Allāh’ is derived from this and so the meaning of ‘Allah’ is the Object of
Worship. So what the unifiers say, ‘There is no god but Allah’ means ‘there
is no object of worship other than Allah.’ Here ‘illā’ means ‘other than
(ghayr)’, not ‘except.’ Some claim that the root is the hā’ which alludes to the
third person. That is since they affirm Him as existing in their natural
intellects and indicate Him with the letter of allusion. Then the lām of
possession is added to it since they know that He is the Creator and Master
of things, and al then is added for magnification.
The second position is taken by a group of scholars, including ash-Shāfi‘ī,
Abu-l-Ma‘ālī, al-Khaṭṭābī, al-Ghazālī, al-Mufaḍḍal and others, and is
related from al-Khalīl and Sībawayh. It is that the alif and lām are a

 necessary part of it and cannot be elided from it. Al-Khaṭṭābī said that the
evidence that the alif and lām are an intrinsic part of the structure of this
name and not added as the definite article is that it is included in the
vocative, as ‘Yā Allāh!’ The vocative is not combined with the definite
article alif-lām. One does not say, ‘Yā ar-Raḥmān’. [but rather Yā Raḥmān].
Allah knows best.
There is also disagreement about the derivation of ar-Raḥmān. Some of
them said that it has no derivation because it is one of the names particular
to Him, and if it had been derived from mercy (raḥmah), it would be
connected to the one shown mercy and it would be possible to say, ‘Allah is
Raḥmān to His slaves,’ as one does with raḥīm. If it had been derived from
raḥmah, the Arabs would not have denied it when they heard it because they
did not deny the mercy of their Lord. Allah says, ‘When they are told to prostrate
to the All-Merciful, they say, “And what is the All-Merciful?” (25:60)’
At al-Ḥudaybīyah, when ‘Alī wrote at the command of the Prophet g ‘In
the Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, Most Merciful,’ Suhayl ibn ‘Amr said, ‘As for
the words “In the Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, Most Merciful,” we do not
know “In the Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, Most Merciful”! Rather write “In
Your Name, O Allah.”’ Ibn al-‘Arabī says that this indicates that they did
not know the attribute rather than the One Described. Evidence is found in
the fact that they said, ‘What is the Raḥmān?’ not ‘Who is the Raḥmān?’ Ibn
al-Ḥaṣṣār said, ‘It is as if he, may Allah be merciful to him, had not recited
the other āyah, “Yet they still reject the All-Merciful.” (13:31)’ The majority of
people believe that it is derived from raḥmah, and is intensive, meaning the
One who possesses mercy such as no one else has. It has no plural or dual
whereas raḥīm can be dual or plural.
Ibn al-Ḥaṣṣār said that part of what indicates the derivation is what at-
Tirmidhī transmitted as sound from ‘Abd ar-Raḥmān ibn ‘Awf. He heard
the Messenger of Allah g say, ‘Allah Almighty says, “I am the All-Merciful.
I created kinship (raḥim) and split it as a name from My Name. Whoever
maintains ties, I maintain ties with him. Whoever severs it, I sever him.”’
This is a text indicating its derivation and so there is no point in contention
about it. The denial of the Arabs was simply due to their ignorance of Allah
and what is mandatory for Him.
Al-Anbārī mentions in az-Zāhir that al-Mubarrad stated that ar-Raḥmān is
a Hebrew name. Abū Isḥāq az-Zajjāj says in Ma‘ānī al-Qur’ān that Aḥmad

 ibn Yaḥyā said that ar-Raḥīm is Arabic and ar-Raḥmān is Hebrew. This
view is unwarranted.
Abu-l-‘Abbās says that the attribute is for praise as you might say, ‘Jarīr the
poet.’ Muṭarrif related that Qatādah said that ‘In the Name of Allah, the All-
Merciful, Most Merciful’ is Allah praising Himself. Abū Isḥāq says that this is a
good position. Quṭrub says that it is possible that the two are combined for
stress. Abū Isḥāq says that this is also a good position and using it for stress
has a greater benefit and that is often used in Arabic. There is no need to
attest to it. The benefit in that is what Muḥammad ibn Yazīd said: ‘It is
favour after favour and blessing after blessing, and it strengthens the hopes
of those who desire and is a promise which will not fail.’
There is disagreement about whether the two names Raḥmān and Raḥīm
have one meaning or two meanings. It is said that they mean the same, as
do nadmān and nadīm. It is said that Raḥmān is a special name with general
action and Raḥīm is a general name with a particular action. This is the
position of the majority.
Abū ‘Alī al-Fārisī said that Raḥmān is a general name for all types of mercy
for which Allah is singled out. Raḥīm can be used for how He is towards the
believers, as He says, ‘He is merciful (Raḥīm) to the believers.’ (33:43).
Al-‘Arazamī says that Raḥmān is merciful to all His creatures with rain,
physical and general blessings, and Raḥīm is merciful to the believers in
guiding them and being kind to them. Ibn al-Mubārak said that when the
Raḥmān is asked He gives and when the Raḥīm is not asked, He is angry.
Ibn Mājah related in the Sunan and at-Tirmidhī in al-Jāmi‘ from Abū Ṣāliḥ
from Abū Hurayrah that the Messenger of Allah g said, ‘If someone does
not ask, Allah is angry with him.’ At-Tirmidhī transmitted it. The version in
Ibn Mājah has: ‘If someone does not make supplication to Allah, He is
angry with Him.’ Ibn Mājah said, ‘I asked Abū Zur‘ah about this Abū
Ṣāliḥ. He said, “This is the one who is called al-Fārisī. He is Khūzī. I do not
know his name.”’ One of the poets took this idea and said:
Allah is angry when people fail to ask of Him
while the sons of Ādam are angry when they are asked.
Ibn ‘Abbās said that they are two fine (raqīq) names, and one is finer than
the other, meaning that it has more mercy. Al-Khaṭṭābī said, ‘This is

 problematic because fineness has no place in any of the attributes of Allah.’
Al-Ḥusayn ibn al-Faḍl al-Bajalī said, ‘This is an error on the part of the
transmitter because fineness (riqqah) is not part of the attributes of Allah at
all. Rather they are two compassionate (rafīq) names, one more
compassionate than the other. Compassion is one of the Attributes of Allah
Almighty. The Prophet g said, “Allah is Compassionate. He loves
compassion and gives for compassion what He does not for harshness.”’
Most scholars agree that the name ar-Raḥmān is used only for Allah
Almighty and it is not permitted to call anyone else by it. Do you not see
that He says: ‘Say: “Call on Allah or call on the All-Merciful”’ (17:109)? So it is
equal to the Name in which none but Him shares. He says: ‘Ask those We sent
before you as Our Messengers: Have We ever designated any gods to be worshipped besides
the All-Merciful?’ (43:44) So they reported that the Raḥmān deserved
worship. Musaylimah the Liar – may Allah curse him – was outrageous and
called himself ‘the raḥmān of Yamāmah’ and so was called ‘the Liar’. It is the
term by which he was known. It is also said that the name ar-Raḥmān is the
Greatest Name of Allah. Ibn al-‘Arabī mentioned that.
Ar-Raḥīm is general and can be used in respect of creatures. As ar-
Raḥmān is universal, so it is brought forward in order before ar-Raḥīm in
harmony with revelation. Al-Mahdawī stated that. It is said that the
meaning of ar-Raḥīm is: ‘It is by the Raḥīm that you reach to the Raḥmān.’
So ar-Raḥīm is the attribute of Muḥammad g and Allah described him as
having that quality; He says: ‘compassionate, merciful (raḥīm)’ when
describing him. So it as if the meaning of saying, ‘In the Name of Allah, the All-
Merciful, the Most Merciful’ is ‘It is by Muḥammad g that you will reach Me,’
in other words, ‘by following him and what he has brought, you will reach
My reward, honour and the vision of My face.’ Allah knows best.
It is related that ‘Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib said, ‘Bismillāh is healing from every
illness and protection against every disease. Ar-Raḥmān is a help for
everyone who believes in Him. It is a name not used for anyone else. Ar-
Raḥīm is for those who repent, believe and perform righteous actions.’
Some of them explained the meaning according to the letters. It is related
that ‘Uthmān ibn ‘Affān h asked the Messenger of Allah g about the
interpretation of ‘In the Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, the Most Merciful.’ He
said, ‘The bā’ is the trial (balā’) of Allah, His relief, brilliance and radiance
(bahā’). The sīn is the splendour (sanā’) of Allah. The mīm is the kingdom

 (mulk) of Allah. As for Allah, there is no god but Him. The Raḥmān is kind
to both the pious and impious of His creatures. The Raḥīm is kind only to
the believers.’ It is reported that Ka‘b al-Aḥbār said, ‘The bā’ is His
radiance (bahā’), the sīn is His splendour (sanā’), and there is nothing higher
than it. The mīm is His kingdom, and He has power over all things and
nothing is hard for Him.’
It is said that every letter is the opening of one of His Names. The bā’ is the
key to His Name Baṣīr (All-Seeing). The sīn is the key to His Name, Samī‘
(All-Hearing). The mīm is the key to His Name, Mālik (Master). The alif is
the key to His Name, Allah. The lām is the key to His Name, Laṭīf (Kind).
The hā’ is the key to His Name, Hādī (Guide). The rā’ is the key to His
Name, Rāziq (Provider). The ḥā’ is the key to His Name, Ḥalīm (Forbearing).
The nūn is the key of His Name, Nūr (Light). The meaning of all this is
supplication of Allah at the beginning of everything you do.
There is disagreement about how ‘ar-Raḥīm’ is connected in recitation to
‘al-ḥamdu lillāh’. Umm Salamah related that the Prophet g recited ‘ar-
Raḥīm’ with a sukūn on the mīm, stopping there and then beginning with a
fresh alif. Some of the Kufans recited it in that way. Most people recite, ‘ar-
Raḥīmi-l-ḥamdu’, with a kasrah on the mīm and connecting it to the alif in al-
ḥamd. Al-Kisā’ī reported that some Arabs read it ‘ar-Raḥīma-l-ḥamdu’, with
fatḥah on the mīm and connected to the alif, as if the mīm was in fact silent,
but with an elision into the alif. Ibn ‘Aṭiyyah said, ‘This recitation is not
reported from anyone I know.’

 Contents
1. Translator's note
2. Introduction
3. The general virtues of the Qur’an and encouragement to study it. The
excellence of the one who seeks it, recites it, listens to it and acts by it.
4. How to recite the Book of Allah and what is disliked and forbidden in
respect of it, and people’s disagreement about that
5. Cautioning the people of the Qur’an and scholars against showing off
6. What someone who knows the Qur’an must do and not neglect to do
7. The syntax of the Qur’an, learning it and studying it, and the reward
for the one who recites the Qur’an with proper inflections
8. What is reported about the excellence of tafsīr of the Qur’an and those
who do it
9. What is reported about the one who is a bearer of the Qur’an, who he
is and those who are hostile to him
10. The respect and esteem for the Qur’an which is mandatory for
someone who recites and bears the Qur’an
11. What is reported regarding threats against engaging in tafsīr of the
Qur’an by means of opinion (ra’y) or being bold in doing that, and the
ranks of the commentators
12. The Book being explained by the Sunnah, and what has been
transmitted about that
13. How to learn and understand the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His
Prophet g, and what has been narrated about it being easier for
someone who used to act by it without memorising it
14. The meaning of the words of the Prophet g, “The Qur’an was revealed
in seven aḥruf (dialects/modes).”
15. Section on the seven readings
16. Section: The hadith of ‘Umar and Hishām
17. The collection of the Qur’an and the reason ‘Uthmān had copies of the
Qur’an copied out and burned the rest. The memorisation of the
Qur’an by the Companions in the time of the Prophet g
18. Section
19. Section

 20. What has come about the order of the sūrahs and āyahs of the Qur’an,
its vowelling and dots, its ḥizbs and tens, the number of its letters,
juz’s, words and āyahs
21. Section
22. Section
23. Section
24. Section
25. The meaning of the words sūrah, āyah, kalimah (word) and ḥarf (letter)
26. Does the Qur’an contain words which are not Arabic?
27. Points about the inimitability of the Qur’an, preconditions of the
miracle and its reality
28. Section
29. Information about hadiths forged about the excellence of the sūrahs of
the Qur’an and other matters
30. What has come on the refutation of those who attack the Qur’an and
oppose the text of ‘Uthmān by adding to it or removing some of it
31. Seeking Refuge with Allah from Shayṭān
32. The Basmalah

 